For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office
Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov

SUBJECT
Comprehensive Review of European Issues (U)
The President has directed that the Policy Review Committee,
under the Chairmanship of the Department of State, undertake a broad
review of US policy concerning key European issues. The review should
be completed no later than March 1, 1977.
9 [1]. Secret. Hyland forwarded the memorandum to Brzezinski for signature on January
29, stating it had been thoroughly coordinated with the Department of State and the
Department of Defense. (Ibid.) On January 5, two weeks prior to the inauguration, the
President-elect’s team held a “mini” NSC meeting to discuss the foreign policy agenda
for the administration. Included in the Summary of Conclusions of the meeting was a
recommendation that a comprehensive review of Europe be held prior to the NATO
Ministerial meeting scheduled to take place in London May 10–11. Carter approved the
Summary of Conclusions of the meeting. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs,
Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 78, Brzezinski, Chron
to/from President: 1/77)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
The review should address the following issues:2
[Omitted here is information unrelated to Eastern Europe.]
4. Eastern Europe: This section should analyze the situation in the
area in terms of general trends—political, economic and social stability.
The status and outlook in each country for relative internal liberaliza-
tion and external independence should be examined. In particular,
there should be a discussion of how the US should approach the area
and the countries involved; whether and how we should differentiate
among the countries in trading or political relations, e.g., treat them
more or less uniformly, or primarily as a function of the policy toward
the USSR, or on the basis of other criteria, e.g., should US policy be
more forthcoming toward Eastern European countries that are rela-
tively more liberal internally (e.g., Poland and Hungary), or relatively
more independent from Moscow (e.g., Romania). This review should
include an examination of the role of RFE/RL. This analysis should
also address the GDR in the context of US-German and Berlin policies,
as well as Eastern Europe.
5. Security Issues: East-West: An analysis should be made of East-
West relations in Europe, probable trends, tradeoffs, and issues or
contingencies that might arise. It should examine the constraints on
further progress, the main elements of an East-West agenda and priori-
ties of US policy. This analysis should include an examination of Soviet
policy and objectives in European security. In particular, the following
sub-issues should be covered:
(a) MBFR: As a follow up to the priority work being undertaken
in PRM/NSC–6,3 an analysis should be included in this study of the
role of mutual force reduction (including MBFR) in East-West relations,
its priority, objectives, prospects, as well as possible US initiatives.
(b) CSCE: This section should describe the status, and examine
the utility of CSCE, particularly for increasing East-West contacts and
effecting changes in the human rights area. It should analyze the role
of CSCE in the overall East-West relationship and its priority in US
policy during and beyond the Belgrade Conference.
(c) Berlin and Germany: This section should describe the present
situation in terms of the Quadripartite Agreement, the inter-German
relationship, possible Soviet-GDR moves, and the efficacy of current
Allied consultative arrangements; an examination should be made of
whether the Three Western Powers and/or the FRG should undertake
2 The memorandum also covered European relations, NATO, and economic issues.
Scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XXVII, Western Europe.
3 PRM/NSC–6 ordered a review of U.S. policy toward MBFR. Scheduled for publica-

Eastern Europe Region
any new initiatives to improve the situation; analysis also should
include the FRG-Soviet relationship in broader European security
terms.
Zbigniew Brzezinski
2.
Editorial Note
In a February 9, 1977, memorandum to the National Security Coun-
cil’s Special Coordination Committee (SCC), Deputy Assistant to the
President for National Security Affairs David Aaron reported on a
January 26 meeting of the Special Activities Working Group (SAWG)
to discuss and review all approved covert action programs and other
sensitive activities. Aaron reported that for each activity, the group
considered a) relevance to U.S. policy objectives; b) achievements; c)
risks; d) budgetary costs; e) alternative courses of action; and f) conse-
quences of termination. The group did not seek to identify new possibil-
ities for covert action. The SAWG also “assumed that the SCC and the
President wish to limit USG involvement in covert special activities to
the greatest extent possible consistent with U.S. interests.” On covert
support for publishing materials targeted at the Soviet Union and
Eastern Europe, the group found that the program was generally desir-
able, and in the U.S. interest to continue. “However,” Aaron wrote,
“issues were raised which suggest the need for a more searching exami-
nation of the scope and mode of operation. For instance, there has
been no recent comprehensive review of the policy objectives of this
program, even though the internal political situations in Eastern Europe
and the USSR have changed in some important respects.” (National
Security Council, Carter Administration Intelligence Files, Box I–022,
On February 21, Samuel Hoskinson of the National Security Coun-
cil Staff, forwarded a memorandum to Assistant to the President for
National Security Affairs Zbigniew Brzezinski with the agenda for the
upcoming SCC meeting on intelligence activities. Concerning the Soviet
Union and Eastern Europe publication program, the prepared talking
points recommended that Brzezinski stress the need to do more in the
area and that new ideas for what the U.S. Government could do were
necessary, especially in the area of respect for human rights. (Ibid.)
Following the February 24 SCC meeting, Brzezinski sent President
Jimmy Carter a memorandum on February 28, seeking approval of the

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
SCC recommendations to continue several Soviet Union and Eastern
Europe programs, including the book publishing program. On the
Soviet and Eastern European program, Brzezinski wrote: “Given the
growing importance of the human rights problem throughout this
whole area, I feel this program should probably be expanded.” Brzezin-
ski also informed Carter of Secretary of Defense Harold Brown’s recom-
mendation for this program. Carter approved the continuation of the
program. (Ibid.) On March 4, Brzezinski informed Brown, Secretary of
State Cyrus Vance, and Acting Director of Central Intelligence E. Henry
Knoche of Carter’s decision to continue the book and publication pro-
gram for the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe subject to a review as
to scope and mode of operation. (National Security Council, Carter
Administration Intelligence Files, Box I–020, Minutes of SCC Intelli-
gence Working Group 1977)
3.
Paper Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency for the
Special Activities Working Group1
Washington, February 4, 1977
USSR AND EAST EUROPE
SYNOPSIS: The Agency’s covert action program against the USSR
and Eastern Europe is intended to sustain pressure for liberalization
of the domestic and foreign policies of the Soviet Union and the coun-
tries of Eastern Europe, and to lessen Soviet domination of Eastern
Europe. It is designed to complement broader overt U.S. government
programs such as the broadcasts of Radio Liberty and Radio Free
Europe as well as the educational, cultural, technical and scientific
exchange programs; plus a growing number of activities in the private
sector—both in the U.S. and Europe.
The program’s objectives are pursued by supporting the dissidents
in the USSR and EE, specifically in their struggle for elementary civil
liberties. Owing to the inherent intolerance of the communist regimes
handwritten. Hoskinson forwarded the paper, which was prepared at the request of the
Special Activities Working Group, to Brzezinski under a February 21 covering memoran-
dum at Tab E of Brzezinski’s briefing book for the February 24 SCC meeting.

Eastern Europe Region
to any form of dissent, this struggle—whether over freedom of religion
or freedom to emigrate—is inevitably a political one.
The program promotes the free movement of information and
ideas through the publication and internal distribution of books and
periodicals containing information denied Soviet and East European
Bloc citizens by their regimes. During 1976 some 170,000 books and
periodicals were infiltrated into the USSR or handed to Soviet citizens
abroad. An additional 145,000 books and periodicals reached Eastern
Europe. These items range from samizdat (writings which could not be
published in the USSR which are smuggled to the West, published and
clandestinely re-infiltrated into the Soviet Union) to translations of
Western authors. They deal with a wide range of politically important
subjects such as recent history (including the historical ‘fiction’ of Alex-
andr Solzhenitsyn), non-Marxist economics and sociology, as well as
literary works.
The program also seeks to support the dissidents fighting for
human rights in the USSR and Eastern Europe by generating publicity
for their cause, and by exposing and protesting human rights violations
in these countries. The dissidents themselves are unanimous that such
publicity is essential to their survival. Examples of such activity in
1976 include publicity efforts conducted in support of Soviet dissenters
Vladimir Bukovskiy, Yuriy Orlov (chairman of a small committee
organized to monitor Soviet compliance with the CSCE accords) and
Andrey Tverdokhlebov, the imprisoned secretary of the Moscow chap-
ter of Amnesty International.
The eight activities which comprise the program are mutually sup-
porting and inter-related. These are:
1. A book and periodical distribution activity which distributes
proscribed literature (primarily in Russian and the Eastern European
languages) to Soviet and Eastern European citizens, either in the West
(to visiting diplomats, trade delegations, cultural groups, tourists, etc.)
or in the East (where they are smuggled in by tourists or sent to
exchange students and other resident Westerners who then pass them
along to target personalities). (FY 77 $1,200,000)
2. A literary advisory activity which uses specialists in Russian
literature to select materials meriting publication for subsequent distri-
bution in the Soviet Union, and publish them through one of several
proprietary outlets. Some 10–12 books in Russian and Polish are pub-
lished annually. (FY 77 $250,000)
3. A Russian language newspaper published in Paris which seeks
to support and stimulate dissidence among Soviet intellectuals. (FY
4. A human rights activity which uses a small number of activists
in Western Europe to publicize Soviet and Eastern European abuses
of human rights. (FY 77 $105,000)
5. A Russian emigre organization (National Alliance of Solidar-
ists—NTS) which engages in procurement, publication and clandestine

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
distribution of literature and socio-political commentary in the Russian
language, and in some political activity in the USSR. (FY 77 $200,000)
6. A Czech-language quarterly magazine aimed at Czechoslovak
intellectual dissidents. (FY 77 $125,000)
7. A literary institute in France which publishes a monthly Polish
language magazine and selected books directed at Polish intellectuals
and youth. (FY 77 $115,000)
8. A Ukrainian emigre group which in addition to promoting the
cause of Ukrainian national identity, seeks to encourage the many
national minority groups to unite with the Russian dissidents in their
struggle for national and cultural identity. (FY 77 $245,000)
POLICY:
This program is consistent with U.S. policy toward the Soviet Union
and Eastern Europe in recent years.
GAINS:
—The dissident movement in the USSR, whose prospects were
viewed with considerable pessimism by many observers as recently
as a year ago, has shown remarkable tenacity and vitality. The activity
of dissidents fighting for greater civil liberties in Poland and Czechoslo-
vakia, has greatly increased in the past year. Testimony is available
from internal dissidents and from recent emigres interviewed in the
West that the operations which publish and distribute literature and
periodicals are effective in terms of reaching their targets and sustaining
the existence and growth of democratic movements in the countries
involved.
—Prominent dissidents such as Leonid Plyushch, Andrey Amalrik
and Vladimir Bukovskiy who have been expelled or allowed to emi-
grate in the past year have been active and effective in dramatizing
the situation of their fellow dissidents in the USSR, and in generating
publicity and mobilizing public support in the West for the cause of
human rights in the USSR and Eastern Europe. This activity, especially
when done by professed Marxists such as Plyushch or the Czech emigre
Jiri Pelikan has been a factor contributing to the strong stance taken
by the French and Italian communist parties for the cause of human
rights in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe.
RISKS:
—The growth of dissidence in Eastern Europe, especially in Poland, could
reach crisis proportions insoluble by the regime and intolerable to the USSR.
It has been argued that this could lead to Soviet intervention and repression.
If such a crisis occurs, we believe it will be primarily owing to grave economic
and other factors little affected by our covert action program to support
human rights.
—Many of these operations are “covert” action in name only. U.S. Gov-
ernment, and indeed CIA, support for the instruments involved is widely

Eastern Europe Region
known to or suspected by friend and foe alike. Nevertheless, cover mechanisms
of private sponsorship are necessary fig leaves which permit other Western
governments to tolerate the activity of these instruments on their soil. Accusa-
tions of CIA sponsorship have often been made by the East and have had a
negligible effect on the effectiveness of the operations. Official U.S. Government
acknowledgement of such sponsorship or authoritative leaks, however, would
be embarrassing to our Western European allies and could well force disman-
tling of some of the publishing and distribution operations.
—The impact of these operations on bilateral relations between the U.S.
and the USSR is negligible. As noted, the USSR already knows about most
of them. More important, ideological warfare is consistent with the Soviet
Union’s perception of detente.
—Operational activity intended to coordinate and sustain publicity and
protests on human rights violations is much more discreet and selective. In
this area, exposure of the role played by CIA assets could involve the loss of
support from some segments of the Western public.
—Some of the publications and human rights publicity generated in West
Europe filter back to the United States and are picked up by U.S. media. We
see no impropriety here, since no false propaganda or deception is involved.
COSTS:
—The total budget for FY 1977 is $2,650,000. Of this amount, book
distribution receives over [number not declassified] of the budget. Pub-
lishing accounts for approximately [number not declassified], and human
rights publicity approximately [number not declassified]. In terms of
targeting, approximately [number not declassified] of the funds go to the
operations against the USSR, with the remaining [number not declassified]
directed primarily to the Czech and Polish operations.
—In the past few years there has been a reduction in the resources
available to this program (in FY 1974 the budget for essentially the same
operations was almost $4,000,000). Despite cost economies, inflation is
taking an inevitable toll on the level of activity possible on a fixed
budget.
ALTERNATIVES:
—Some of the book distribution effort could be funded and admin-
istered openly by the U.S. Government, perhaps in the same manner
as the radios. That should work well in the United States, and could
be tried on a pilot basis to supplement the existing covert program.
However, it would probably not be possible to continue or adequately
replace the present covert distribution mechanism in Europe, which
involves discreet contact with Soviet, EE, and foreign nationals, and
the contravention of customs regulations in the East.
—The periodicals in Czech and Ukrainian which we publish or
subsidize could receive overt U.S. Government funding. In such a case,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
the Ukrainian and Czech magazines could move to the U.S. if necessary,
and would probably continue to be effective. The Polish journal and
the Russian newspaper cannot be moved from [less than 1 line not
declassified], and it is doubtful that they would be permitted to continue
operation in [less than 1 line not declassified] if U.S. proprietorship were
acknowledged.
—Activity to stimulate and coordinate publicity and protests of
human rights violations could be left to the initiative of private organi-
zations and individuals, but we believe this would involve a significant
loss of momentum and continuity.
—There is no likely alternative U.S. funding for [less than 1 line not
declassified]. If our covert subsidy was terminated, [less than 1 line not
declassified] would survive on a reduced scale but its operational effec-
tiveness would be greatly impaired.
CONSEQUENCE OF TERMINATION:
—Termination of the entire program would have a negative effect
on the prospects and morale of the dissident movements in the USSR,
Poland and Czechoslovakia. It would probably be interpreted by the
dissidents and by the regimes as a U.S. policy decision to subordinate
support for human rights in those countries to bilateral policy
considerations.

Eastern Europe Region
4.
Executive Summary of a Paper Prepared by the Policy
Review Committee1
Washington, undated
Presidential Review Memorandum/NSC–9
COMPREHENSIVE REVIEW OF EUROPEAN ISSUES
[Omitted here is discussion of U.S.-West European relations,
NATO, economic issues, and East-West security issues (MBFR, SALT,
V. Eastern Europe
This PRM response analyzes four possible options for US policy
toward Eastern Europe:
A. Differentiate more sharply in favor of Eastern European countries
which demonstrate greater foreign policy independence from Moscow. In
effect this means increasing the preferential status of Romania at the
expense of Poland, Hungary, and the others. Since there are limits to
how much further we can go with Romania, and given the unlikely
prospect that the others will soon show foreign policy independence,
this option by itself could result in US immobilism toward Eastern
Europe.
B. Be more forthcoming toward Eastern European countries that are
relatively more liberal internally. In effect this option favors Poland and
Hungary over Romania and the others. While this approach would be
the clearest signal of our belief in human rights, it would inhibit our
flexibility to pursue a close relationship with countries (e.g., Romania)
which do not meet our human rights criteria but whose activities serve
our interests in other ways.
C. Give preference to Eastern European countries that are either relatively
liberal internally or relatively independent internationally, but limit our ties
March 2, Michael Hornblow, Acting Staff Secretary of the National Security Council
forwarded the paper to the members of the Policy Review Committee. (Ibid.) On March
4, Treverton sent Brzezinski a memorandum analyzing the study paper. Treverton wrote
that the full report was “long and loose” but that some parts, “for instance the section
of Eastern Europe—is quite good.” Referring specifically to the Eastern Europe section
and the four alternatives proposed by the paper, Treverton argued that “the difficulty
with much of the discussion, even the four broad alternative approaches, is that it is
very political in character. There is, for instance, little mention of the looming problem
of Eastern European debt with Western financial institutions. That would bear on our
ability to implement any approach.” (Ibid.)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
with those that are neither. This option widens the range of favored
countries to all but Czechoslovakia, the GDR, and Bulgaria. We would
seek to “reward” the more liberal and independent countries and to
encourage further development of those trends. With the three retro-
grade regimes, our aim would be to encourage liberalization and auton-
omy by holding out the carrot of an advantageous relationship with
us; the problem is that U.S. leverage with them is minimal.
D. Abandon any implicit rank-ordering, and seek to expand contacts and
relations across the board in Eastern Europe to the extent possible and feasible.
This approach would seek to cut the link between certain basic US
actions—e.g., the extension of most-favored-nation trade status and
access to credits—and Eastern European behavior. It is based on the
assumption that greater internal liberalization and foreign policy auton-
omy in Eastern Europe are more likely to come about as a result of
increased contacts with the US than because we have made greater
liberalization and/or autonomy preconditions for expanding contacts.
This approach is designed to set a firm basis for increased US influence
over Eastern European policies over the long term. But it is vulnerable
to the criticism that we would be “rewarding” and “legitimizing”
repressive regimes.
On two unique cases:
—Our bilateral objective with the GDR over the next few years
should be to increase our presence, our contacts, and our knowledge.
This should be done in a way which is consistent with our broader
policy interests concerning the FRG, Berlin and European security.
—Towards Yugoslavia our primary objective should remain to
encourage Yugoslavia’s continued independence of the Soviet Union
and to give the Soviet Union no reason to think that armed intervention
or a bid for predominant political influence would not have the gravest
effect on East-West and US-Soviet relations. And we should continue
to reserve all our options in response to such Soviet action.2
2 Not included in the Executive Summary, but included in the larger body of the
paper, is an analysis of Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty. The paper concluded that
Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty are important to U.S. foreign policy, that their mission
is consistent with the Helsinki Agreements regarding free flow of information, and that
the radios have become “considerably more effective in responding to the interests of
listeners in recent years.” A larger study on Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty and Voice
of America was prepared by the Ford Administration and submitted to Congress by
the Carter administration. See Document 45.

Eastern Europe Region
5.
Intelligence Memorandum Prepared in the Central
Intelligence Agency1
Washington, April 1, 1977
DISSIDENT ACTIVITY IN EAST EUROPE: AN OVERVIEW2
To those who think history unfolds in cyclical patterns, the recent events
in Eastern Europe have an ineluctable logic. Twenty years ago or so it was
the street upheavals in East Germany, the Poznan riots in Poland, and the
Hungarian revolution. A decade later it was the “Prague Spring” and then
the food riots in Polish coastal cities. And now, there is again very serious
trouble in Poland and a recrudescence of unrest and dissident activity in
Czechoslovakia, East Germany, Yugoslavia and, to a lesser extent, Hungary
and Romania.
The underlying causes remain essentially unchanged:
—All of the regimes in Eastern Europe are, to varying degrees, repressive
and do not command the loyalty of their people.
—The geopolitical ties to the USSR are at war with strong nationalist
sentiment and the emotional and cultural pull of the West.
—The economic performance of the regimes is deficient.
But there are new elements contributing to the current problems in
Eastern Europe. Foremost among them is the USSR’s detente policy. It has:
—Promoted and therefore made legitimate the idea of increased inter-
changes with the West.
—Resulted in a series of agreements, notably those involving increased
contacts between the two Germanies and the Helsinki accord that reduced
the isolation of the East European people (particularly its elites) and raised
expectations of more to come.
—Fostered an atmosphere that has made it more difficult for the regimes
to deal with their internal control problems in authoritarian ways abhorrent
to Western sensibilities.
in East Europe: An Overview. Secret; [handling restriction not declassified]. The report was
prepared in the Office of Regional and Political Analysis.
2 In a June 16 memorandum, Brzezinski forwarded parts of the report to President
Carter. Brzezinski noted that, “given the timeliness of this topic” he thought Carter
would be interested in excerpts from the report. He underlined the paragraphs referring
to each Eastern European country in part and noted the country in the margin. Carter
initialed the covering memorandum indicating he saw it. (Carter Library, National Secu-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
—Increased Moscow’s stake in order, stability, and quietude in Eastern
Europe even while it increased pressures from the West that tend to be
destabilizing.
The flowering of Eurocommunism in Western Europe is another new and
troublesome problem for the East European regimes and Moscow—not only
because its leading proponents have given verbal aid and comfort to East
European and Soviet dissidents but, more important, because it has appeal
within the ruling parties in Eastern Europe.
The Soviets and East Europeans must also be concerned that President
Carter’s statements on human rights and particularly his exchange of letters
with Soviet dissident spokesman Andrey Sakharov, give evidence of a new
policy that is designed to cause trouble for the USSR in its own backyard.
Even if the Soviets believe that is not Washington’s intention, they will be
worried that the effect will be the same. Moscow’s misgivings in this regard
will be in proportion to its concerns about the degree of unrest in Eastern
Europe. Given the history of the postwar period, Moscow may well have a
bias toward alarm. But in view of the prevailing situation in Poland, even
an outside observer would conclude that Moscow has cause for concern.
[Omitted here is a map of Eastern Europe.]
The Dissidence: Where Things Stand
—The situation in Poland is by far the most volatile in Eastern
Europe. A major blow-up could come at any time. The popular mood
has remained tense and sullen since the outbreak of workers’ unrest
last summer, although the regime has taken steps to dissipate the
discontent. Dissatisfaction is rooted in economic problems that the
regime cannot solve nor significantly ameliorate any time soon. More-
over, the dissatisfaction of the Polish people extends beyond the eco-
nomic and into fundamental questions regarding the competence and
legitimacy of the entire system and its leaders. Under these circum-
stances, Poland’s professional intellectuals and dissidents have a good
deal to work with. They established a Workers Defense League, raised
funds for the families of workers jailed after the June rioting, and are
now calling for an amnesty and an investigation of police abuses.
Not surprisingly, while the Polish dissidents have given some verbal
support to the Czechoslovak Chartists, they have been preoccupied
with their own problems and opportunities in Poland.
The authorities who beat a hasty retreat before the workers’ wrath
last summer have, since last fall, handled the intellectuals with kid
gloves. The leadership is acutely aware that they face a volatile situation
and that a direct confrontation, with the potential creation of martyrs,
must be avoided. The regime is trying to prevent the growth of coopera-
tion between the workers and the dissident groups, and Gierek has
released some workers and promised an amnesty for others, even while

Eastern Europe Region
he has refused to undertake the investigation the Workers Defense
League hopes will provide a focus for more fundamental criticism.
—The problem in East Germany is somewhat analogous to that in
Poland in that it also involves popular unrest. It is different in that
disquiet has not manifested itself in violence or overt acts of hostility
to the regime. The temper in East Germany seems to be less churlish
than in Poland and far less volatile. There is no evidence that any of
the dissident groups are united.
The Honecker regime is greatly concerned about the attraction of
the West, particularly West Germany, for the East German population.
Three out of every four East German homes receive, and presumably
watch, West German television. Millions of travelers from the West
enter East Germany every year. Against this kind of “subversion,”
Honecker’s attempts to create an East German nationalism have fal-
tered, and the regime’s classical means of control seem almost
irrelevant.
The Helsinki accords have made life ever more difficult for the
East German regime. Acting under its provisions, large numbers—
perhaps tens of thousands—of East Germans have applied for exit
visas to emigrate to the West. The regime is taking steps to discourage
such applications, and it is doubtful that it will allow many East Ger-
mans to emigrate no matter what the pressures from the West. No
one knows the degree of skepticism or cynicism with which such
applications are made, but disillusionment and resentment toward the
regime could prove to be a problem.
We have seen some signs of increased restiveness among workers
manifest in complaints about working conditions, wages, and hours.
It is hard to tell how serious this is. So far, we see little evidence
that the regime feels itself under great pressure from the workers. A
worsening of the economic situation could lead to unification of the
various groups dissatisfied with the regime’s policies.
Last fall, the regime had some trouble with clergy in the Lutheran
church and with a few outspoken dissident intellectuals. The latter
have not been overtly sympathetic with the Czechoslovak Chartists,
nor have they brought organized sustained pressure on Honecker.
The regime’s carrot-and-stick tactics have been relatively successful in
keeping things quiet within the intellectual community.
—The Czechoslovaks have taken center stage among East European
dissident intellectuals by their direct challenge to regime practices
regarding civil rights, as outlined in “Charter 77,” a manifesto which
was prepared early last fall but not propounded until January. The
Chartists—a mix of well-known oppositionists who were active in the
political arena during the “Prague Spring” and a surprisingly large
number (more than 600) of other intellectuals and technocrats—clearly

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
have the authorities worried. One Czech [less than 1 line not declassified]
has reported that nervous colleagues have been watching what the
Chartists say, particularly on ideological questions, since they went
public. One reason the regime is concerned is that the Chartists repre-
sent, in a figurative sense, the plight of a vastly larger number of people
(perhaps as many as half a million), who were purged after 1968 and
whose political and other rights remain severely circumscribed. As
apostles of the aborted effort to give socialism a “human face,” many
of the Chartists consider themselves forerunners of the Eurocommu-
nism of the 1970s. The government has harassed the Chartists and has
arrested several, but has not initiated a thoroughgoing crackdown. One
of the Chartists’ leading spokesmen, Jan Patocka, died shortly after
interrogation last month (he was not physically abused), but his funeral
took place without incident, and as far as we know there was no
popular reaction to his death.
—The small number of Romanian dissidents have been deeply
divided by personal feuds and different goals, but some common
ground has been found in Charter 77. The dissidents consist mainly
of unknown artists and intellectuals who do not command national
prestige. Novelist Paul Goma’s “open letter” in support of the Chartists
and a Romanian version of the Czech manifesto are the only recent
evidence of vitality. The dissident’s letter strongly criticized party
leader Ceausescu’s personal role and his authoritarianism. In Romania,
they make clear, the problem is not the Soviets, but Ceausescu himself.
This personal attack may account for Ceausescu’s vitriolic speech blast-
ing the dissidents, but the Romanian leader did not follow up with
harsher measures. On the contrary, Goma was allowed to see the party
number-one man on cultural affairs, and there were even suggestions
that some of Goma’s work might be published. Goma has not backed
off and joined by a hundred-odd known sympathizers who signed his
manifesto, he continues his struggle.
—Dissidence in Hungary has elicited no signs of serious concern
from the regime. A small number of intellectuals have publicly sup-
ported the Chartists, but thus far they have not criticized conditions
in Hungary. Ironically, while party leader Kadar’s soft line has been
successful at home, it has caused him some troubles with colleagues
in Eastern Europe and perhaps the USSR as well. He is in a strong
position as long as the Hungarian dissidents behave themselves and
Hungary continues to be one of the quieter countries in Eastern Europe.
—There is little active dissent in Bulgaria, still Moscow’s most
dependable and ideologically conformist ally. Some passive resistance
and unhappiness with living standards is evidenced by occasional
work slowdowns and a widespread apathy, but this is nothing new.
The aged top leadership will inevitably need to be replaced before long,
and this might provide a new climate that would stimulate dissent.

Eastern Europe Region
—Opposition to the political establishment in Yugoslavia is unorga-
nized, and factionalized, but is nevertheless worrisome to the Tito
regime. Evidence of dissatisfaction, and the employment of harsh
measures to suppress it, would bring into the open the regime’s repres-
sive character and make it more difficult for the leadership to argue
that Yugoslavia is qualitatively “different” from other communist
states. The regime’s attitude toward dissent is colored by its abiding
concern regarding the nationalities problem; all dissent is seen as poten-
tially destabilizing.
Although such well-known personalities as Milovan Djilas and
Mihajlo Mihajlov have long spoken out against government policies
and communist practices, the intellectuals and students now criticizing
passport policies and supporting the Chartists are not known to the
general public.
The government has responded cautiously to dissident accusations
that it is ignoring the human rights provisions of Helsinki. But it quickly
expelled three West Germans who tried to publicize the issue in Febru-
ary, and is making strenuous behind-the-scenes efforts to keep dissent
under wraps. The regime is also showing the stick to Yugoslav protest-
ers. Two signers of the petition on passport policy have reportedly lost
their jobs, and more punitive actions may be taken. The Constitutional
Court rejected their appeal on 24 March. Belgrade’s immediate concern
is to limit adverse international publicity, as this would seriously
embarrass the regime in view of Yugoslavia’s role as host of the Confer-
ence on Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE) review meetings.3
It has circulated the word that it may pardon some well known dissen-
ters such as Mihajlov before the meeting as a gesture of Yugoslavia’s
good intentions on the human rights front.
The Dissidents
There have always been individuals in Eastern Europe, even in
quiet times, who have called themselves or have been called “dissi-
dents,” and have come forward to criticize the existing socio-political
order. In recent months nascent dissident organizations in two coun-
tries of Eastern Europe, Poland and Czechoslovakia, have come into
the open. The Workers Defense League in Poland, by the very act of
adopting a name, has sent a signal that it aspires to, if it is not in fact,
a corporate organization. The Charter 77 group in Czechoslovakia has
meet in two years to review implementation of the act’s provisions. A preparatory
meeting of experts is scheduled to be held on June 15 in Belgrade to decide on the dates
and agenda for the main follow-up meeting, at, or below, the foreign minister level,
which also is to be held in Belgrade this fall—possibly starting in early October and
lasting up to three months. [Footnote is in the original.]

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
not been quite so adventuresome; indeed, because organizing or joining
political groups is illegal, the Chartists have denied that they constitute
a political organization. How close the League and Charter 77 have the
attributes of real organization—active membership, coherent structure,
recognized leadership and thought-out programs, strategies, and tac-
tics—we do not know. Elsewhere in Eastern Europe the dissidents tend
to be small, loosely organized groups of dissatisfied persons, whose
political philosophy in many cases comes close to social democracy,
but who frequently have varying views, interests, and objectives.
By and large, the leading figures and spokesmen for the dissidents
are individuals who have had a history of fighting for increased free-
doms. No new charismatic figure has emerged. But a large number of
new people who have not previously been identified as dissidents
have signed letters and petitions in Czechoslovakia and Poland. The
emergence of such people must be of concern to the regimes. One
danger in instituting a harsh crackdown on the petition signers is that
these new people who have come forward will be turned into hard-
core activists.
There is evidence of some contacts among East European dissi-
dents, but it is doubtful that there has been much consultation or
coordination of tactics. Not surprisingly, the dissidents are not only
preoccupied with their own problems, but also must be aware of their
limited power to influence political developments elsewhere in Eastern
Europe. More important are the practical difficulties that stand in the
way of a coordinated effort.
Still, there is no question that, despite the problems of communica-
tion and the like imposed by operating in closed societies, a dissident
movement now exists in Eastern Europe. It finds expression in the
open support given to the Czechoslovak Chartists by dissident groups
in several East European states. The East European dissidents have
also learned from one another, and particularly from their Soviet coun-
terparts. The Soviet dissidents have led the way in showing how the
Western media, especially under the conditions of detente, can be used
to embarrass the regime and to promote the activities, and even well-
being, of the dissidents. More than that, Sakharov and others have
shown that it is possible to speak out and be heard and still survive.
The Soviet dissidents, for their part, have gone on record that they
share a common cause with like-minded individuals in Eastern Europe.
Sakharov, for example, recently noted that his efforts “are part of a
struggle throughout the world, a struggle that seems especially impor-
tant at this moment when in Czechoslovakia, Poland, and other coun-
tries of Eastern Europe the movement is reaching a new level.” A
statement signed by 62 Soviet dissidents, released in early March, spe-
cifically expressed support for the Chartists, and the so-called Helsinki

Eastern Europe Region
monitoring group in the USSR has also praised the efforts of the East
European dissidents.4
The impact of such statements is to buttress the concept of a com-
mon cause among the dissidents and to encourage them to believe that
they are not alone in their efforts. Such expressions of mutual support
may also persuade the Soviets, who are not known for their objectivity
on such matters, that a “plot,” involving a network of dissidents of
several countries and possibly with outside support, is in existence.
The Question of Popular Support
It seems safe to assume that there is a reservoir of popular sympa-
thy, if not support, for the dissidents. After all, they stand in opposition
to the regimes, and we have reason to believe that the people of Eastern
Europe, in varying degrees, are disenchanted with both those who rule
them and the system in which they live. We know that the dissidents,
most of whom are members of the intelligentsia, have tried to reach
out to the wider community. In Poland, the Workers Defense League
was so named precisely for this reason. In Czechoslovakia, the Chartists
have been trying to speak to the interests of the working class; a letter
released in late March talked about the trouble that Czech workers
had in making a living and other working class themes. (Ironically, at
the same time the Czechoslovaks were deemphasizing human rights
in favor of more prosaic concerns, the Poles were headed in the opposite
direction. In late March, another organization—“Movement for the
Defense of Human and Civil Rights”—was created in Poland. Was this
an admission that the direct overtures to Polish workers by the League
was a failure? Or perhaps too dangerous?)
Whatever our presumptions about the likelihood of shared atti-
tudes between the dissidents and the people, the fact is that there
is little evidence that the people have either tangibly supported the
dissidents or are prepared to do so. The dissidents themselves make
no great claims of having the allegiance, loyalty, or support of the
worker or other groups. There has been no significant student agitation,
one key barometer of unrest. The dissidents have not, for the most part,
attempted to establish direct personal contacts with various segments
of the population by such means as speeches in factories and the
dissemination of circulars. Such actions, of course, would be considered
incitement and thus subject to punishment.
Many East Europeans, recalling the events in Hungary in 1956 and
in Czechoslovakia in 1968, would doubtless believe it futile to show
support for the dissidents, even assuming that an issue would come
4 This paragraph concluded the pages forwarded by Brzezinski with his June 16
memorandum to Carter. See footnote 2 above.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
to the fore around which they could rally. Popular engagement is, of
course, further limited by the lack of a free media and the efficiency
of the organs of control.
But the absence of overt popular support for the dissidents does
not necessarily mean that the East Europeans will permanently accept
the status quo. Nationalist sentiments appear not to have diminished,
and many East Europeans do not identify their interests with those of
the Soviets, nor with their own rulers. This is understood in Moscow
and in the East European capitals, and it is why the Communist leaders
are always nervous about internal order.
Goals
It seems unlikely that any group of dissidents has developed a
serious long-range, defined strategy aimed at achieving fundamental
or revolutionary political changes. While the dissidents are, almost by
definition, visionaries, they are also aware of their limited resources,
the lack of active popular support, and, most important, the ever-
present threat posed by the Soviet Union and its troops. They try to
modify the strictures which prevail so as to gain elbow room to push
for eventual change. This is not an inconsequential objective, for if the
dissidents succeeded in expanding the limits of permissible political
activity, they would be creating the preconditions for more fundamen-
tal change. This is one reason the regimes feel they cannot give ground
by recognizing the kind of broad “rights” the dissidents assert, even if,
in practice, they are willing or are compelled to tolerate their activities.
In no instance are the dissidents explicitly or overtly pressing for
a change in the system of government or adopting anti-party or anti-
regime positions. They have focused instead on the failure of the several
regimes to observe specific human rights which all have formally
acknowledged both in internal legislation and international treaty. The
Chartists, for example, are championing a full range of human rights,
including the right to have work commensurate with education and
training, access to educational institutions, freedom of religion, the
right to voice minority opinions, and freedom of movement.5 Most of
the dissidents, including the East Germans and the Yugoslavs, have
stressed the right to travel, partly, we suspect, because there is a signifi-
cant constituency for this right among the technical and educated elites.
The Chartists and other groups evidently hope that the pressure
they and the West are bringing to bear on human rights may prove
irresistible. They are probably hoping that Moscow will allow the East
5 Some of these “rights” are speaking to the plight of large numbers of party
members purged after the 1968 Soviet invasion, who have had trouble finding good jobs
and whose children frequently cannot get into universities. [Footnote is in the original.]

Eastern Europe Region
Europeans to make concessions in the field of human rights rather than
put at risk the USSR’s relations with the West.
Only time and experience will define how far the dissidents can
go, but for the moment they can claim at least one victory. The Polish
regime recently sent new instructions to writers and publishers easing
censorship and explicitly saying that criticism of party and government
people was permissible—within limits. The dissident intellectuals have
long thought that the Soviets would allow the regime more latitude than
it realized and that it could be pressed into according more freedom
to the intellectual community.
The US Impact
Except for the letter sent by the Czechoslovak dissident Kohout to
President Carter, there is little hard information on what the East
European dissidents make of Washington’s recent pronouncements
and actions regarding human rights. There is, of course, a danger
that hopes and expectations will be raised to unrealistic, and even
dangerous, levels. But we have no evidence that this is the case, nor
is there any evidence that the dissidents have changed their tactics as
a consequence of the new attention to human rights in Washington.
We suspect that the dissident opinion contains a certain cynicism
regarding the US commitment to human rights if it comes into conflict
with US equities regarding the USSR. The dissident activity in East
Europe had begun well before President Carter was elected, or took
office. It has waxed and waned since the end of January, in part as a
consequence of the amount of attention it has received from the Western
media. The dissidents almost certainly regard the President’s state-
ments as a new plus; publicity in the West and the kind of pressure
on the regimes that is implicit in Washington’s statements, are vital to
the dissidents’ hopes of bringing about change.
There is no evidence, circumstantial or otherwise, that President
Carter’s remarks have had a significant impact on how the East Euro-
pean regimes are dealing with their dissidents. The regimes have been
responding to developments, almost on a day-to-day basis, within the
framework of a general approach dictated by the particularities of their
own internal situation and the inclination of their leaders. In all the
regimes, continuity rather than discontinuity has been characteristic.
Hence, the Czechoslovaks and East Germans have tended to be tougher
than the Poles or the Hungarians. And the policies of the Romanians
and the Yugoslavs have been somewhere in the middle.
There is little reason to doubt that the US administration’s position
on human rights has been a cause for some concern in the East European
capitals. The Yugoslav leadership, for example, must be concerned that
their violations will undermine the kind of support they think they

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
need to fend off the Soviets in the post-Tito period. Belgrade believes
it must, for reasons of internal stability, be tough on dissidents, but at
the same time it has given signals that it may free some well-known
dissidents, clearly to strengthen its standing in the West as a “different”
Communist state. Ceausescu had some very harsh things to say in
public about the human rights statements of “certain politicians,” but
the Romanians, too, need the US, and the fact is, for all of Ceausescu’s
fulminations, the handful of Romanian dissidents have been treated
with a light hand. The problem is different for Gierek and Kadar, both
of whom favor a more tolerant approach to the dissidents. If President
Carter’s statements, and the internal situation in the USSR, causes
Moscow to impose a tougher line on dissidents across the board in
Eastern Europe, then Kadar and Gierek will have trouble—particularly
Gierek, who is up against a highly volatile and unpredictable situation
in Poland.
Eurocommunism
There is an important relationship between Eurocommunism and
the current unrest in Eastern Europe. Support from the West European
Communist parties, which espouse those ideas that have come to be
called “Eurocommunism,” has helped the dissidents by enabling them
to argue that there is no necessary contradiction between Marxism
and Western-type political freedoms. Some of the dissidents may well
believe that Communism with a “human face” is possible, although
others are probably using Eurocommunism opportunistically, perhaps
as a cover for the more profound changes they want.
TheEastEuropeanregimescouldhandlethis,butwhatgivesthem—
and Moscow—real concern is that Eurocommunist ideas, particularly as
they relate to autonomy from the USSR, have attraction for people inside
the apparat. In a sense, Eurocommunism threatens to bridge the concep-
tual gap between the dissidents and the establishment.
The European Communist party conference in Berlin last June, dur-
ing which Eurocommunism proponents forcefully put forward their
views, evidently caused considerable ferment within some of the War-
sawPactcountries.AttheDecemberWarsawPactideologicalconference
it was, reportedly, noted that the Berlin document has led to confusion,
sympathy for Eurocommunist ideas, andthe need to combat the “spread
of a deviant concept of proletarian internationalism.”6
Eurocommunism was high on the agenda at last month’s Warsaw
Pact ideological meeting in Sofia. We do not know what, if anything,
was decided. [less than 1 line not declassified] at an earlier meeting the
6 See CIA/OPR Research paper, Soviet Policy and European Communism, October
1976, [classification and handling restriction not declassified]. [Footnote is in the original.]

Eastern Europe Region
Soviets raised the idea of supporting splinter groups within the offend-
ing parties. That Moscow would even talk about such a major step
suggests the depth of its concern. We do know that the Soviets tried
to prevent the Madrid meeting of the three leading Western European
Communist parties last month, evidently because they feared that it
would produce more outspoken criticism of the repression of Soviet
and other dissidents. The communique of the Madrid meeting was soft
on the human rights issue, perhaps as a consequence of Soviet
pressures.
United Leaderships?
Except for Poland, the dissident problem has led to little or no
observed political fallout within the East European leaderships. A num-
ber of personnel changes were made in Warsaw last December, and it
looks as though Premier Jaroszewicz will lose his job sometime this year.
Even the Polish problem is not strictly one of “dissidence,” but rather
concerns fundamentals of economic and political mismanagement.
With the possible exception of Romania, where Ceausescu runs
something close to a one-man show, there are divisions or differing
tendencies along a “liberal-conservative” continuum. One would
expect to see some exacerbation of these differences as a consequence
of the dissident activity. But the evidence to support that expectation
is not very strong. We know that there have been longstanding and
deep divisions in Yugoslavia over internal security policies, including
the way to handle dissidents, but it is not clear how, or if, the divisions
have come into play during the recent flare-up.
In Czechoslovakia, the leadership is divided between hard liners
and more pragmatic conservatives led by party leader Husak, but
these differences do not appear to have affected in any major way
the regime’s handling of the Chartists. Both factions, whatever their
inclinations at the outset, must have realized the implications of
Charter 77, and neither would be inclined to pursue a soft policy like
that of Gierek in Poland. Although Husak successfully resisted hard-
line pressure for trials of people responsible for the “Prague Spring,”
he has also shown an ability to pursue a conservative tack when neces-
sary. The hard liners probably prefer a decisive crackdown on the
Chartists, but if so they have not yet had their way. Moscow has a
good deal to say about tactics on such problems in Czechoslovakia,
and the chances are good that it has supported the tough, but not
harsh, stand taken by Husak.
In East Germany, the regime is not completely united on how to
deal with dissidents; for example, in the Biermann case7 there is evi-
7 Wolf Biermann, a popular dissident singer and poet, who was in trouble with the
regime for many years, was not permitted to return to the GDR following a tour to West
Germany last fall. [Footnote is in the original.]

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
dence that the “hawks” won out. The extent of differences within the
leadership is hard to measure, however, and probably varies from case
to case depending on the circumstances.
Within the Polish leadership there has been some pushing and
shoving on how to react to the dissidents; those favoring a moderate
response have thus far been on top. A high-ranking Polish official
claims that Poland’s fastest rising political star, the new Central Com-
mittee economic secretary and former foreign minister Stefan Olszow-
ski, has argued for continued tolerance for a degree of dissident activity.
Proponents of a harsher course have been noted in the upper manage-
rial levels of the media. The Politburo as a whole recently indicated
its support for the moderate course by criticizing the past performance
of the media.
The East European leaders have differed among themselves on the
appropriate way to deal with the dissidents. According to one account,
strong differences with regard to approaches to the dissident problem
were expressed at the Warsaw Pact summit last November. Kadar
reportedly was extolling his own conciliatory approach, implicitly as
an example for others (“after all, there is no great dissident problem
in Hungary, comrade”), but it seems more likely that he was on the
defensive, holding out against Honecker and others who want a tough
line across the board in Eastern Europe and believe that anything less
is dangerous.
The Soviets
Moscow is obviously concerned about the unrest in Eastern Europe.
A blowup anywhere in Eastern Europe has important implications for
the stability of the regime affected, for its ties to the USSR, and even
for the internal tranquility of the USSR. Moscow’s first concern must
be Poland, where, as we have indicated, the situation is both volatile
and unpredictable. Worse, there is no quick or easy fix for what ails
Poland, and there is little that Moscow can do to help, except, perhaps,
by sending in large amounts of economic assistance. This the Soviets
have been unwilling to do, possibly because of their own economic
needs or because they are not certain that such aid would help that
much, or because they are not persuaded that the situation in Poland
has reached critical proportions. Whatever the case, the Soviets have,
at least until now, been willing to go along with Gierek’s moderate
approach to Polish dissidents and also to Poland’s economic problems.
In East Germany, Moscow has supported Honecker’s efforts to get
on top of the problems caused by the Helsinki accords and the increased
Western influence on the East German population. But the problem
for Honecker, and Moscow, is that the steps he has taken to promote
an East German identity, for example, by eroding the special status of

Eastern Europe Region
the GDR’s capital, East Berlin, are not likely to significantly ameliorate
the yearning of many East Germans, particularly those in the technical
and professional classes, to travel or emigrate to the West. Detente in
central Europe has created internal pressure on Honecker that will not
go away unless detente goes away. Honecker can impose measures
that will significantly curtail the GDR’s contacts with the West and
will dampen the expectations of the East German people for a Western
“life style,” but such measures would quickly add up to a significantly
changed atmosphere between the two Germanies and in Europe as a
whole. Neither Honecker nor the Soviets want this to happen, and
therefore they have adopted palliatives rather than remedies in dealing
with the unrest in East Germany. This could change if the East German
situation gets worse, and that is why the Soviets must be watching
events there closely and must be concerned that dissident activity and
unrest elsewhere in Eastern Europe will adversely affect East Germany.
The variety of approaches in Eastern Europe to the dissident prob-
lem is prima facie evidence that Moscow has foregone imposing any
set line on its allies. The Soviets feel uncomfortable with the more
permissive approaches of the Hungarians and Poles, but they have
permitted both Kadar and Gierek to fashion their tactics to fit their
own circumstances. Moscow’s forebearance is dependent on:
a) Confidence that, whatever their deviations from the Soviet
model, Kadar and Gierek are essentially good Communists who will
not be metamorphasized into social-democrats and who will not forget
the special relationship with the USSR.
b) A measure of stability and order in Hungary and Poland. Kadar’s
most powerful argument for his policies is also the simplest: that it
works, i.e., that Hungary does not have a dissident problem, and is
still a Marxist state faithful in its own way to the USSR. Gierek clearly
argues from a weaker base and is compelled to make the case, not
without merit, that if things are bad in Poland now, they would be a
good deal worse if he tried to crack down on dissidence. If they get
worse anyway, Gierek will be in deep trouble with Moscow.
There is evidence that Moscow’s attitude toward the problem of
dissidence in Eastern Europe may be changing. For one thing, the
Soviets have become tougher with their own dissidents since the first
of the year. This makes it easier for Moscow to call upon their allies
to take a harder line. As a result, permissive approaches are pushed
further from the norm and hence less acceptable.
There are reports the Soviets leaned on both the Poles and the
Hungarians at an ideological conference in Sofia early last month. So
far, we see little evidence of a toughening line on the dissidents in
either country, or for that matter, in Czechoslovakia or East Germany.
One report claims that the Soviets have told the Poles that they
must adopt more orthodox economic policies. The Soviets clearly have

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
grounds for complaint. They have never been comfortable with
Poland’s crazy quilt of socialism and private enterprise. In December,
Gierek announced a series of socio-economic reforms whose purpose
is to strengthen the private sector of the economy. This surely has not
gone unnoticed in some circles in Moscow. But it would be very difficult
for Gierek to renege on his public promises, and Moscow could buy
itself a real problem if it forces him to do so.
Short-Term Prospects
The odds favor continuity over the next few months. Poland will
continue to be highly volatile and there could be a blowup similar to
last summer’s or even worse. But Gierek and company, knowing the
stakes, made policy adjustments and will probably muddle through.
Honecker will continue to feel the pressures from the West and to be
aware of the basic restiveness of the East German people, but he is not
likely to do anything drastic (e.g., significantly cut back the interchange
between the two Germanies) that would seriously threaten public order
in East Germany. The dissidents in Czechoslovakia, Romania, Hungary,
and Yugoslavia will step up their activities with an eye to the Belgrade
review conference, but the respective regimes ought to be able to cope
with them with little trouble. The dissidents in those countries are not
likely to get more popular support over the next three to six months
than they enjoyed in the past three months.
This assessment could turn out wrong if:
—Mischance, misfortune, or miscalculation intrude. While Gierek
appears to have learned from the bad mistakes he made last year, this
does not mean he will not make another. The sudden death of dissident
spokesman Jan Patocka in Czechoslovakia illustrates the sort of unex-
pected event that could narrow the gap between the dissidents and the
population, although this has not occurred thus far in Czechoslovakia.8
Moreover, the Soviets and some of the East European leaders are more
nervous and sensitive than normal about the situation in Eastern
Europe. They could overreact to trouble.
—The dissidents press their case beyond the permissible. So far, the
dissidents have acted with considerable restraint, and even finesse.
They have not forced the regimes into taking harsh actions, but they
could change their tactics and engage in activities (overt or covert
agitation, propagandizing among workers, acts of violence, civil disobe-
8 Anniversaries also sometimes prove difficult for the various regimes. For example,
oppositionists in Yugoslavia can be expected to counter or denigrate the regime-spon-
sored extravaganza planned to celebrate Tito’s 85th birthday on May 25. Among other
such anniversaries which could serve as a focal point are June 17 (the 1953 East Berlin
of Czechoslovakia in 1968). [Footnote is in the original.]

Eastern Europe Region
dience, etc.) that would compel the regimes to make tough decisions
on how to respond. Under such circumstances, the chance of miscalcu-
lation and overreaction increases.
—Economic conditions grow significantly worse. A bad harvest this
summer leading to food shortages might draw a quick and strong
reaction from consumers. In some countries, economic expectations
have been high: clear-cut evidence that those expectations will not be
realized any time soon could cause trouble. This may be especially
true in East Germany; the average worker there is better off than his
counterparts anywhere else in Eastern Europe, but his expectations are
consequently higher and his standard of comparison is the West, not
the East.
—The Soviets force the East Europeans to get much tougher on the
dissidents and on economic policies. There is some, but not yet persuasive,
evidence that this may already be happening in Poland and Hungary.
If it does occur, the odds of serious trouble in Poland and elsewhere
in the next several months would go up appreciably.
—There is a widespread perception of change in Washington’s attitude
toward dissent in Eastern Europe. If US-Soviet relations seem to be deterio-
rating and the US is seen to be pushing Moscow on human rights issues,
the Soviets might respond by ordering a crackdown on dissenters in
Eastern Europe and their ties to Western newspapers, etc. At the same
time, the dissenters might be encouraged by the seeming resolution of
the US to press their case harder and more forthrightly. This could be
a dangerous mixture. If there is a perception that the US has backed
down or significantly modified its stand on human rights, some dissen-
ters might be disillusioned and become more subdued, but others might
be inclined to force the issue on both superpowers before Belgrade.9
9 Attached but not printed is a chronology of key events relating to dissidence in
Eastern Europe from 1976 to March 1977.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
6.
Summary of Discussion of a Policy Review Committee
Meeting1
SUBJECT
Europe
PARTICIPANTS
State:
NSC:
Secretary Vance
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski
Arthur Hartman
David Aaron
William G. Hyland
Defense:
Robert Hunter
Harold Brown
Gregory F. Treverton
Charles W. Duncan
Henry Owen
Gen. William Smith
Maynard Glitman
OMB:
Bowman Cutter
Treasury:
C. Fred Bergsten
Commerce:
Frank Weil
CIA:
Stansfield Turner
ACDA:
Robert Bowie
Leon Sloss
John Newhouse
CEA:
William Nordhaus
[Omitted here is discussion of the London Summits, consultations
with Western Europe, European Communism, and CSCE.]
5. Eastern Europe
There was discussion of the relative merits of PRM-response option
(3)—bias toward Eastern European states that are either somewhat
liberal internally or somewhat independent of the Soviet Union—ver-
sus (4)—efforts to expand contacts across the board without a ranking.2
Brzezinski argued strongly for (3); it provides a standard, recognizing
Situation Room.
responses had been overtaken by preparations for the London Summits. With regard
to the Eastern European portion of the PRM response, Treverton stressed that what the
administration needed was “a coherent policy where one has not existed.” The PRM
response, Treverton continued, was “not bad,” listing four possible approaches: 1) “Bias
toward Eastern European states that act with some independence of Moscow;” 2) “Bias
toward those that are somewhat more liberal internally;” 3) “Bias toward those that are
either relatively independent or liberal;” and 4) “Efforts to expand US contacts across
the board to the ‘minimum floor’ now existing only with Poland, Romania, and Yugo-
slavia.” (Ibid.)

Eastern Europe Region
our interest in “polycentrism” and pluralism in the region. Others
agreed, although several pointed out that there might be specific rea-
sons for expanding contacts with the GDR. Brzezinski agreed but sug-
gested that the U.S. should look closely at what specific interests were
advanced by those contacts. There was specific discussion of Hungary;
before consideration can be given to returning the Crown, a judgment
about the domestic political cost will be required. Vance noted a general
consensus on a policy approach between options (3) and (4) and sug-
gested the need for individual country follow-on studies.
In closing, Vance mentioned the need for a review of RFE and RL
program content. The Board for International Broadcasting will be
encouraged and aided in undertaking such a review.
Zbigniew Brzezinski
7.
Editorial Note
On April 22, 1977, Gregory Treverton of the National Security
Council Staff sent a memorandum to Assistant to the President for
National Security Affairs Zbigniew Brzezinski regarding the April 14
Policy Review Committee meeting on U.S. policy toward Europe. (See
Document 6.) Treverton wrote that the Policy Review Committee meet-
ing was disappointing and more focus on the issues was necessary.
He suggested “sharply focused” follow-up studies for four distinct
issues: “the U.S. approach to European unity and possible economic
competition; European Communist parties; CSCE; and possibly Eastern
Europe.” Treverton attached two draft memoranda for Brzezinski. The
first, informed President Jimmy Carter that Brzezinski and Secretary
of State Cyrus Vance were dissatisfied with the discussion at the April
14 meeting and that both recommended several short follow-up studies
to be discussed at a second Policy Review Committee meeting. The
second was a draft Presidential Review Memorandum requesting the
four follow-up studies be completed by June 15. (Carter Library,
zinski initialed the memorandum to Carter, only to change his mind
later and indicate on the Treverton memorandum that he intended to
discuss the issue with the President orally. (Ibid.)
Brzezinski signed the tasking for follow-up studies related to PRM–
9 on April 22. The tasking requested that the Policy Review Committee
“under the chairmanship of the Department of State, continue its review

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
of U.S. policy toward Europe by focusing on the four key issues. The
basis for that review should be four short, sharply-focused papers,
clearly setting out the issues and alternative U.S. approaches, together
with their implications.” Specifically on Eastern Europe, the Policy
Review Committee was directed to “spell out the practical differences
between PRM–9 response option 3—bias toward Eastern European
countries that are either somewhat liberal internally or somewhat inde-
pendent of Moscow—and option 4—an effort to improve relations
across the board with no prior ranking. How would different countries
be affected differently by the two approaches? What are the implica-
tions of the two approaches for our approach to human rights, trade
and U.S. relations with the Soviet Union? The review should also
identify any special cases—for instance, perhaps, the GDR—and sug-
gest what might be gained by expanded contacts with them.” (Ibid.)
8.
Paper Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1
Washington, undated
SUBJECT
PERSPECTIVES—Human Rights in the USSR and Eastern Europe
1. In recent weeks the tempo of dissident activity and harsh official
reaction has accelerated throughout Eastern Europe. The pre-Christmas
exchange of imprisoned Soviet dissident, Vladimir Bukovskiy, for
Chilean Communist leader Luis Corvalan received international media
coverage and focused renewed attention on the human rights scene.
Since the exchange, the Orlov Committee, organized to monitor Mos-
cow’s compliance with the Helsinki Conference on Security and Coop-
eration in Europe (CSCE), and other Soviet dissidents have endured a
rash of arrests, interrogations and house searches where the KGB has
planted false evidence. In January a group of Czech intellectuals and
Prague Spring leaders issued a legalistic human rights manifesto,
“Charter 77;” Prague reacted immediately with police harassment.
These events provide an appropriate peg for reviving world interest
typed notation under the subject line indicates the paper was approved by the Department
of State on May 17. See Note on U.S. Covert Action for further information on “Perspec-
tives” papers.

Eastern Europe Region
in the human rights movement in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe
and for updating covert action themes in support of this goal.2
2. The Soviet human rights movement has suffered important losses
in the past year. Moscow has expelled some of the most effective
dissident leaders, like mathematician Leonid Plyushch and now Bukov-
skiy, or harassed them into emigrating, as in the case of Andrey Amal-
rik. Life has become even more difficult for the dissenter who is unpro-
tected by publicity and its attendant constraints against official
reprisals. The latest form of reprisal is physical violence, disguised as
random street crimes. In April, dissident historian Konstantin Boga-
tyrev died from massive wounds inflicted by “unknown assailants.”
Most of his friends believe the attack was KGB-inspired, and, according
to several sources, the KGB threatened Bogatyrev’s doctor. More
recently, Nobel Peace Prize winner, Andrey Sakharov, and others
observing a protest vigil on Soviet Constitution Day (5 December) were
assaulted by KGB-infiltrated bystanders. This tactic of physical assaults
may have spread to other countries. In Czechoslovakia, for example,
former politician Dr. Frantisek Kriegel was assaulted by masked men
following his involvement in anti-government protests.
3. An effective countermeasure for these tactics is publicity. So far
the human rights movement has survived official reprisals but would
probably not survive a total, Stalin-style crackdown. Such a crackdown
has not occurred in part because Soviet authorities remain sensitive to
the pressures of world opinion. Addressees are asked to tap media
assets, liaison and other local contacts to continue the campaign to
keep dissidence alive in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe.
4. The following State Department-approved themes are intended
as updated guidelines for your covert action efforts:
A. Continue to insist that CSCE means something, particularly
Basket Three which eases regulations concerning the practice of reli-
gion, travel and the flow of information. Point out areas where the
Soviet bloc signatories might demonstrate closer compliance. Encour-
age, for example, broader dissemination of printed material, Western
newspapers, books, bibles, etc., to the East European population. Press
for increased cooperation among mass media organizations and pub-
lishing houses. Publicize instances where sensitivity over charges of
2 On April 22, the Department of State also approved a “Perspectives” paper on
Soviet interference in other countries’ affairs. The “Perspectives” guided worldwide
media assets to “remind audiences of Moscow’s continued meddling in East Europe’s
internal affairs,” from Hungary in 1956 to Czechoslovakia in 1968. The paper continued:
“The 600,000-man Red Army still stationed in Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Poland and
East Germany is a daily reminder of the potential danger in adopting policies not
sanctioned by Moscow.” (National Security Council, Carter Administration Intelligence

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
violating CSCE has prompted conciliatory gestures, e.g., the easing of
restrictions against Western journalists. Point out that the Soviet and
East European governments will have to comply more closely with
the human rights provisions of the Helsinki accords or lose face—
and propaganda points—this summer when the 35 CSCE signatories
reconvene in Belgrade.
B. Downplay the deleterious effects of the recent wave of emigra-
tions and expulsions. Stress that important dissident leaders, notably
Andrey Sakharov, one of the founding fathers of the human rights
movement, are still active inside the Soviet Union. The Orlov Commit-
tee has received international attention since its establishment last May
and continues, despite official harassment, to compile and publicize
evidence of Soviet violations of the Helsinki accord. Remind audiences
that the dissident movement has produced a number of strong leaders.
In the past, new personalities have emerged to carry on the struggle
after leaders like Solzhenitsyn have been expelled.
C. Continue to publicize the evidence of human rights violations
which recent emigres provide. Remind audiences that dissidents like
Amalrik and Bukovskiy have not lost credibility by leaving the
Soviet Union.
D. Continue to publicize the extreme measures taken against dissi-
dents: harsh prison sentences, psychiatric abuse, and the recent phe-
nomenon of street violence. Focus on key individuals like the ailing
Mustafa Dzhemilev, imprisoned for his efforts on behalf of displaced
Crimean Tatars, Sergey Kovalev and Andrey Tverdokhlevob, sen-
tenced for their activities in the Moscow chapter of Amnesty Interna-
tional, and the members of the Orlov Committee such as Aleksandr
Ginzburg and Lyudmila Alekseyeva, who continue to be harassed by
the KGB.
E. Expose Moscow’s increasing independence [dependence] on the
more devious tactics against dissidents, designed to paralyze the
human rights movement over the long term without attracting signifi-
cant publicity. Soviet officials continually interfere with communica-
tions between dissidents and the outside world: by intercepting mail,
jamming phone conversations and harassing would-be interviewers
from the Western press. A customs regulation instituted last July sub-
stantially increased the duty on gifts sent to the USSR and thus undercut
the financial support which religious groups, families of political pris-
oners and “refuseniks” (dissidents, usually Jews, who have been denied
emigration visas and subsequently fired from their jobs) receive from
abroad. More recently, the KGB has taken to planting evidence, e.g.,
foreign currency, to incriminate such dissidents as Aleksandr Ginzburg
and members of the Kiev and Leningrad branch of the Orlov Commit-
tee. Remind audiences that such measures, though less dramatic than

Eastern Europe Region
imprisonment and torture, also violate the spirit, and frequently the
letter, of the Helsinki accords.
F. Generate publicity on the key human rights issues in other
East European countries. In Czechoslovakia, for example, focus on the
Charter 77 manifesto and the official reprisals against its authors. Polish
workers who demonstrated against the June announcement of price
increases have been fired and some arrested; some of their defenders,
members of the Workers Defense League, have subsequently lost their
jobs. The German Democratic Republic continues obstructing reunions
of families separated by the East/West border; recently East Berlin
imposed exile on dissident balladeer Wolf Biermann. According to
recent reports, the health of veteran critic of the Yugoslav regime,
Mihajlo Mihajlov, imprisoned under particularly harsh conditions, is
deteriorating rapidly.
G. Encourage CP contacts, where feasible, to view objectively
human rights violations in the Soviet bloc. Several West European
parties have already demonstrated varying degrees of independence
from the CPSU. In 1976 they reacted sharply to Plyushch’s account of
psychiatric abuse and to films of Soviet labor camps. More recently
they denounced Prague’s reprisals against the Charter 77 group.
H. Appeal to local and international professional and religious
organizations to speak out on behalf of persecuted colleagues in the
USSR and Eastern Europe: authors, artists, engineers, historians, clergy,
etc. Where feasible, urge these groups to promote professional contacts
with their Eastern colleagues.
I. Persuade agents of influence and liaison contacts that their gov-
ernments could make a contribution to human rights everywhere by
speaking out on behalf of dissidents—especially those governments
with strong socialist credentials or those which have protested human
rights violations in non-socialist countries. Stress the importance of
many voices, representing differing systems, working to influence
Soviet and Eastern European leaders in a matter of international
concern.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
9.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, June 24, 1977
SUBJECT
Prospects for Eastern Europe
The Intelligence Community recently published a report entitled
“Prospects for Eastern Europe.”2 The estimates provided in that report
are interesting and I have summarized them below:
—Unrest is likely to grow in Eastern Europe over the next three
years. Destabilizing factors include detente, slower economic growth,
and dissident activity.
—Poland will be the most volatile of the East European states. A
blow-up there, which might bring down Gierek and even conceivably
compel the Soviets to restore order, cannot be ruled out. (I have
included an additional note on the possibility of Soviet intervention at
the end of this memo.)
—The situation will be less volatile in East Germany, but the Hon-
ecker regime is going to have a harder time balancing its economic
need for closer ties to the West with the unsettling effect those ties
have on the East German people.
—In the rest of Eastern Europe, the tension is not likely to get
out of hand. Nowhere will dissident activists by themselves seriously
challenge the regime.
—Under economic pressures, all of the East European countries
will show more interest in expanding their trade with the West. Despite
misgivings, the Soviets will acquiesce or even encourage such expan-
sion because they are increasingly reluctant to subsidize the East Euro-
pean economies.
—East European leaders will continue to give ground, sporadically
and reluctantly, on human rights issues of interest to the West. The
prospects are fair for a slow evolution toward less authoritarian meth-
ods of rule in East Europe. I should note here that the Defense Intelli-
23. Printed from an uninitialed copy.
2 Dated June 10, the memorandum was prepared by representatives of the CIA,
State/INR, and DIA under the auspices of the National Intelligence Officer for Soviet
Union and Eastern Europe. (Ibid.) Brzezinski included copies of the National Intelligence
memorandum in three parts. Carter initialed the June 21 copy, indicating he saw it.

Eastern Europe Region
gence Agency (DIA) does not agree with this part of the estimate.
According to DIA, the necessity for tight centralized party control, the
likelihood of growing unrest, constraints imposed by the USSR, and
the example of Soviet treatment of dissent all argue against these
developments.
—The US is not likely to have a major impact on how the internal
picture develops in any of the East European countries. But the East
Europeans will attach more importance to developing relations with
the US.
I mentioned above that the Soviets might feel compelled at some
point to restore order in Poland. A recent CIA report entitled “Probable
Soviet Reactions to a Crisis in Poland”3 assessed this possibility. The
report noted that there have been three political-economic crises in
Poland over the past 20 years—all without Soviet armed intervention.
Here is the key assessment in that report:
“The Soviets, of course, have the military capability to invade and
occupy Poland (Tab A).4 The Kremlin evidently prefers, however, to
have the Polish leadership make minor concessions to the people to
reduce public frustration. Polish regimes have thus far successfully
used such tactics. At the same time, they have preserved the leading
role of the party, while initiating and executing the transfer of party
authority. There is currently no evidence to conclude that either the
Soviets or the Poles intend to alter this pattern. A crisis could come in
the event that ameliorating tactics failed to pacify the public, or in the
event that the economic situation became sufficiently untenable that
austerity measures would have to be strictly enforced.”
3 Dated June 1977. (Ibid.)
4 Attached but not printed is a map of Poland and the surrounding area. The map
listed major Soviet military units from which Moscow could draw in the event it deemed
Soviet intervention necessary, including 10 motorized rifle divisions and 10 tank divisions
in the German Democratic Republic; 3 motorized rifle divisions and 2 tank divisions in
in the Baltic military district of the Soviet Union (comprised of the Baltic States and
the Belorussian military district (comprised of Belarus); and 8 motorized rifle divisions
and 3 tank divisions in the Carpathian military district (comprised of the western part
of Ukraine). Soviet units in Hungary were not added to the map.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
10.
Memorandum From Gregory Treverton of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, July 15, 1977
SUBJECT
Policy Toward Eastern Europe
This memorandum is a response to your request, sent along by
Rick,2 for the status of policy toward Eastern Europe. Eastern Europe
was one of four PRM–9 (Europe) follow-on studies we commissioned3
(the others were CSCE, European Communism, and general approach
toward Western Europe). I think only two of those four—Eastern
Europe and CSCE—should go forward for PRC consideration. The
Western Europe response raises some interesting longer-term issues,
but they are not the sort that require, or are ready for, immediate
decision. Similarly, the European Communism is a good description
of our current approach, and I doubt that we can say much more in a
general way until we have a better analytic base for understanding the
implications of those powers sharing power in Western Europe. More
specific, short-term decisions—for instance with regard to France or
Italy—should, I think we all agree, be handled in frameworks more
restricted than PRM processes.
However, the Eastern Europe and CSCE studies should be brought
rapidly to PRC consideration and then, I think, to Presidential decision.4
We badly need Presidential determinations in both cases. David5 and
Bob6 talked about the timing of a PRC meeting on CSCE, and Bob and
I met with George Vest today. We agree that the meeting should be
soon, but after the preparatory conference in Belgrade ends so that
Sherer can participate. That will probably mean the very end of July.7
We will continue to consult with State. A meeting on Eastern Europe
might be coupled with CSCE, but CSCE probably will require a meeting
9 [2]. Confidential. Sent for information. Brzezinski wrote at the top of the memorandum:
“RI, GFT—good memo—push for a paper and meeting. ZB” and indicated that the
memorandum should be returned to Treverton and Inderfurth.
2 Inderfurth.
4 Brzezinski wrote “agree” in the left-hand margin next to this sentence.
5 Aaron.
6 Robert King.
7 Brzezinski underlined “the very end.”

Eastern Europe Region
itself. If so, we should point toward a PRC meeting on Eastern Europe
somewhat later. We may need some additional study on Eastern
Europe, though I doubt that another round of studies would produce
much better results. A sharply-focused agenda paper might serve as
well. To that end, I prepared and sent to State a suggested set of
questions on both CSCE and Eastern Europe; that paper is attached.
Attachment
Paper Prepared by Gregory Treverton of the National Security
Council Staff8
Washington, undated
PRM 9 FOLLOW-ON: CSCE AND EASTERN EUROPE
POSSIBLE ISSUES FOR PRC CONSIDERATION
CSCE
The PRM follow-on draft9 is too general and too rhetorical to serve
as a basis for fruitful PRC discussion, let alone decision. But there are
decisions to be made, many of them tactical but most the sort that can
only be taken by the President. The President’s prestige is clearly on
the line at Belgrade; what we do there cannot be perceived as falling
off our commitment to human rights, much less as cutting a deal with
the Soviets. At the same time, CSCE is three baskets, not one, and there
is little to be served by turning the meeting into a confrontation.
Issues that should be considered:
Basic Purposes
No one disagrees that our basic objective is maximum review of
implementation without confrontation. But that raises the issue: how
compatible are those objectives? That in turn raises specific questions:
—presuming there will be some closed-session review of imple-
mentation, do we raise specific cases at all, only a few for illustrative
purposes shunning the most controversial (Orlov, Shcharanskiy),10 or
many including some of the controversial ones?
8 Confidential.
9 Follow-up Study to PRM/NSC–9: CSCE. (Department of State, Bureau of European
Affairs, Office of European Security Political Affairs, Conference on Security and Cooper-
10 Yuri Feodorovich Orlov, founder of the Moscow Helsinki Group, arrested and
sentenced to ten years in prison in 1977. Anatoly Borisovich Shcharansky (Nathan Sharan-
sky), spokesman for the Moscow Helsinki Group and leading refusenik, was arrested on
charges of espionage in 1977 and sentenced to 13 years in prison.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
—what do we say to the press and to non-governmental organiza-
tions outside the conference? We cannot be silent, yet blurring what
goes on inside the conference with what is said outside could provoke
the confrontation we all say we want to avoid. (The Soviets have been
quite clear in indicating that they are prepared to retaliate if need
be.) Can we reach an understanding with the Soviets that will not be
perceived here as a sell out?
—a related issue, as important, is how we deal with members
of Congress who will go to Belgrade as representatives of the CSCE
Commission. So far our relations with the Commission at the working
level are good, and many of the Commission’s interventions have been
useful (for instance, Dole pushed us in a direction quite opposite from
what I might have expected). Yet in the fall, senior members of Congress
will be independent actors no matter what our treaty with the
Commission.
—should our preparations include a fairly detailed self-criticism,
not just in Basket III but in others as well?
—what level representative makes sense for the opening session:
Christopher, Young (as the President has once suggested), or a
lower level?
Balancing the Baskets
The general question is what can be done to make our approach
seem less biased toward Basket III? For instance:
—are there possibilities in the area of CBMs, even though the
Soviets have shown little interest up to now (and others have worried
that CBMs agreed in the CSCE framework will foreclose more valuable
stabilizing measures in MBFR)?
—what dangers are there for us in a thorough review of implemen-
tation of Baskets I and II (for instance, in raising Jackson-Vanik)?
—should we take such a dim view of the “Brezhnev proposals”11
as we have up to now? Why?
Relations with Allies
—how much coordination with allies (and neutrals) makes sense?
Until now our preparations have presumed that very close cooperation
was an—perhaps the—imperative. There is no gainsaying the impor-
tance of close and frank coordination. But we do not want to go to the
On February 2, Brzezinski also sent a memorandum to Vance and Brown with a history
of the SALT negotiations, emphasizing the exchanges that had taken place from 1974
to 1977. (National Security Archive, The Carter-Brezhnev Project, Electronic Briefing
Book, Document IV–20)

Eastern Europe Region
point of diminishing returns: it may be better for us all, and make for
less tension among us, if for some aspects (review of implementation,
for instance) we seek not an identity of action, but parallel action within
an agreed framework (“themes”).
—are different kinds of consultations necessary? They may be, not
as a substitute for the NATO process but in addition to it. What we
hear from the Canadians, and in a less direct but stronger form from
the Germans, is a political worry. That must be responded to in a
political forum, not in the NATO context that emphasizes process over
substance. If there are real differences of view, or real fears among the
Allies about Belgrade, those need to be surfaced, not papered over.
There may be value in some sort of consultation at the foreign minister
or political director level.
New Proposals
—the main issue is clear and we are on the right side of it. The
choice is between trying to pre-empt Soviet grand designs and scoring
points on the one hand, and, on the other, trying to structure a continu-
ing CSCE process with incentives for the East to participate. Yet there
remains the tension between our current (proper) emphasis on con-
structive proposals and the need to convey a sense of political initiative
on our side. Our proposals as a package look less trivial than do many
of the constituent proposals. This may be an area in which unanimity
within the Alliance is not imperative (for instance, there may be no
harm in supporting a proposal like the Belgian one for a human rights
court, presuming the Belgians are still interested.12
—how do we respond to grandiose Eastern proposals—for
instance, for a non-first use of force? Again, there need be no reason
to be fearful. We can convey to the Soviets our belief that CSCE is not
the forum for such proposals. But at the same time we should be
prepared to turn those proposals, if made, to our own purposes, to
make of them something we could accept (even if the East could not).
CSCE in Context
—how does CSCE relate to our bilateral (or other multilateral)
initiatives (this issue is flagged in the follow-on draft)? Should we step
up those initiatives in the months before Belgrade, play them down
or continue as is?
—more generally, are there ways, as yet unrecognized, that CSCE
needs to be made to fit better with our general approach to human
rights, or to relations with Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union (for
12 Brzezinski placed a checkmark in the left-hand margin next to this sentence.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
instance, would move forward with MFN for Hungary be supportive,
neutral or adverse with regard to our CSCE objectives, and vice versa).
Eastern Europe
The primary defect with the current PRM follow-on draft13 is that
it washes out the difference between alternatives. With only several
small exceptions it does not seem from the draft to matter whether we
pursue Option III (bias toward countries that are either somewhat
liberal internally or somewhat independent of the Soviet Union) or
Option IV (efforts to expand contacts across the board). It may be that
the “flatness” of the options reflects the reality of our limited influence
in the region. But the existing draft also contains hints of bureaucratic
compromise.
There are two other main defects in the current draft:
—there is too little richness to the set of policy instruments dis-
cussed. This is obviously related to the general criticism. But supposing
we wanted to take an initiative in relations with Poland, there certainly
is a richer menu of alternatives, if perhaps not an absolutely very rich
one, than is conveyed by the response. The response tends to collapse
all instruments into three: MFN, and claims settlements and consular
agreements where applicable.
—the response needs to have a sharper sense of the domestic
political context. For instance, returning the Crown is probably a non-
starter; and it almost certainly is at the current moment and in relation
to the upcoming Belgrade conference. Similarly, talking about what we
might do to develop further our relations with Poland and Romania—
a good topic and one for which some possible actions should be listed—
ought to be cast against the difficulty we have, at least in the case of
Romania, of doing even as much as we have in the past.
Suggested issues:
Basic Approach
—There is consensus that we seek to foster internal liberalism and
external independence from Moscow in Eastern Europe. But there is
disagreement, perhaps even fundamental, over how. Option III implic-
itly says that good behavior ought to be rewarded, while Option IV
suggests that changes we seek can only occur over the long run with
Office of Policy Planning at the Department of State, forwarded a memorandum to
Christopher through Nimetz with the Department’s draft of the Eastern Europe follow-
up study requested by the NSC on April 22. (National Archives, RG 59, Office of the
Secretariat Staff, Official Working Papers, S/P Director Anthony Lake, 1977–Jan 1981

Eastern Europe Region
increasing contact between East and West. These follow-on studies
may be no place to return to first principles, but without it the policy
alternatives seem too abstract. Worse, the draft turns what looks like
a basic disagreement into something that appears in the end not to
matter: Options III and IV, with very different premises, seem to have
quite similar policy implications.
—how does our policy toward Eastern Europe relate to our policy
toward the Soviet Union? Again, the question is a basic one, but it at
least needs to be raised. In a period of strain in U.S.-Soviet relations,
should we freeze relations with Eastern Europe (as a signal to Moscow)
or make special efforts to move them (as a signal to Eastern Europe)?
Or if it is fair to characterize our posture toward the Soviet Union as
Option IV (subject to Congressional limitations), then does it make
sense to pursue another policy with respect even to the closest Soviet
satellites?14
Differentiations Among Countries
—what are the different policy instruments that might be used to
differentiate among Eastern European countries on some agreed basis?
What are possible initiatives, country-by-country, that might be
employed?
—to put the same question the other way around, is any attempt
to differentiate among countries likely to be swamped by several major
actions, such as returning the Crown or awarding MFN?
—given a general approach, to what extent should specific actions
on our part be conditioned on commitments by the countries (on family
reunification, emigration or other issues), as opposed to using those
actions as rewards for good performance? Is there much practical differ-
ence between the two?
—is there a case for special treatment of the GDR? If so, what is
it? The draft tends to argue that given the GDR’s pivotal position and
given the paucity of our information about it, we should expand our
contacts with it no matter what general approach we take to Eastern
Europe. Is that convincing? How would we expand our contacts with
the GDR? And what would we gain?
—Yugoslavia is omitted from this draft. On what basis? How do
choices about policy toward Yugoslavia—economic, political and mili-
tary—bear on our general policy toward Eastern Europe?
14 Brzezinski highlighted this paragraph in the margin.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
Coordination with Western Europeans
—how much do particular policy options depend on coordination
with Western Europeans? How much cooperation is possible in particu-
lar areas? Are there areas in which our choices could threaten existing
Western European policies or arrangements (for instance the FRG’s
ransoming of ethnic Germans)?
—how can we better understand, and perhaps begin to influence,
the Eastern debt situation? The draft’s idea of a State/CIA/NSC work-
ing group seems a good one.
—are there relations between Eastern and Western European Com-
munist parties that we can and should influence, positively or
negatively?
11.
Paper Prepared in the Department of State1
Washington, undated
PRM 9—EASTERN EUROPE
The Eastern European Section of PRM/NSC 9 discussed alternative
policy approaches to our goal of promoting greater internal liberaliza-
tion in East European societies and enhanced East European independ-
ence from the Soviet Union. This follow-up paper examines the practical
differences between the last two policy options suggested in the origi-
nal study:
—Option III—Give preference to Eastern European countries that
are either relatively liberal internally or relatively independent interna-
tionally, and limit our ties with those that are neither.
—Option IV—Abandon any implicit rank-ordering, and seek to
expand contacts and relations across the board in Eastern Europe to
the extent possible and feasible.
In sum, the practical consequences of Options III and IV would be
very similar for Romania and Poland where we would continue our
present forthcoming policies, and for Hungary where we would recom-
mend return of the Crown and the seeking of MFN/credits authority
forwarding all four requested follow-up studies related to PRM/NSC–9.

Eastern Europe Region
under certain conditions. Both options require at least some normaliza-
tion of particular aspects of our relations with Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia
and the GDR before otherwise deepening bilateral relations or seeking
congressional authority for MFN/credits eligibility. In general, how-
ever, Option IV is disposed to more flexibility with these three countries
while Option III would require a showing of prior progress on human
rights or foreign policy autonomy. The GDR is a special case under
both options; resumption of diplomatic relations came so late that
things began at a very low level. Option IV is inclined toward a some-
what quicker deepening of relations with the GDR following conclusion
of an acceptable consular convention.
Effect on Romania, Poland and Hungary
Under either Option III or Option IV, a number of our policy lines
would be the same or similar for Romania, Poland and Hungary.
In particular:
Romania: We would continue to encourage Romania’s independent
posture by a responsive position on Exim credits, CCC credits, disaster
assistance, cooperation in space and nuclear matters, exchange of high-
level visits and close consultation bilaterally and in multilateral forums.
We would continue to use the need for annual Congressional
review of Romania’s MFN status—pending modification of the Jack-
son/Vanik amendment—to induce Romanian cooperation in allowing
emigration, especially of divided family members, to the US and Israel
and, because of our human rights policy, to encourage Romanian
restraint in domestic human rights matters.
Poland: We would continue to support Poland’s relatively moderate
position in its internal regime by extension of appropriate Exim and
CCC credits, general economic cooperation, political consultations and
exchange of high-level visits.
We would strengthen and heighten our insistence on better Polish
performance on divided family cases, and would continue to encourage
Poland to exercise the restraint it has generally shown in human
rights matters.
Hungary: We would give recognition to the creditable record which
Hungary has established in its treatment of its people and its domestic
differentiation from the Soviet Union (greater freedom for economic
enterprise, good performance on divided families, passable relations
with organized religion, lesser strictures on travel, access to information
and cultural pursuits).
Accordingly, after consultation with Congress and pertinent
domestic interest groups, we would recommend returning the Crown of
St. Stephen as a national treasure belonging to the Hungarian people.
If Hungary is prepared to provide appropriate assurances regarding

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
emigration under Jackson/Vanik, we would also recommend negotiation
of a trade agreement incorporating MFN and making Hungary eligible for
USG credits. If Hungary will not provide such assurances, we would
then have to consider the possibility of modification or suspension of
the Jackson/Vanik amendment with respect to Hungary.
Effect on Bulgaria and Czechoslovakia
Under both options—as under the provisions of NSDM 2122—
several aspects of our bilateral relations with Bulgaria and Czechoslova-
kia would need to be nearly normalized before considering MFN and
credits for each country. The following normalization steps would
be envisaged:
—Bulgaria: We would encourage the Foreign Bondholders Protec-
tive Association to complete its negotiations with the Bulgarian Govern-
ment on behalf of US holders of defaulted pre-war Bulgarian dollar-
denominated bonds.
—Czechoslovakia: We would seek, as a matter of primary impor-
tance, to renegotiate a settlement of nationalization claims acceptable
to the Congress in order to meet our responsibility to US citizen/
claimants, many of whom are now advanced in years. We would
complete negotiation of a cultural and scientific exchanges agreement
and put into effect the consular convention which has already been
negotiated.
Given these normalization steps, Bulgaria and Czechoslovakia
would press for MFN and credits. However, the policy question of
extending MFN/credits eligibility to Bulgaria and Czechoslovakia (or
the GDR) is not expected to arise until the Jackson/Vanik amendment
has been modified. This does not appear an early prospect given the
present course of US-Soviet relations and attitudes on the Hill. Bulgaria
and Czechoslovakia, like the Soviet Union (and the GDR), reject giving
the assurances on emigration which are required by the Jackson/Vanik
amendment. Modification of Jackson/Vanik may come about later in
the wake of improved US-Soviet relations and practical progress on
the emigration problem. In that event, the trade agreement negotiated
with the Soviet Union in 1972—and providing MFN and credit eligibil-
ity for the Soviet Union—could then come into effect without further
negotiation.
Under Option III, following modification or suspension of Jackson/Vanik,
we would require—beyond such normalization steps as described above—
some evidence that Bulgaria and Czechoslovakia (and the GDR) had made

Eastern Europe Region
notable progress toward greater internal liberalization or greater autonomy
from the Soviet Union before granting them MFN and credits. As greater
autonomy is extremely unlikely in Czechoslovakia (and the GDR)
where Soviet troops are present and Soviet security concerns great, or
in Bulgaria which draws marked economic benefits from the Soviet
connection, our decision would turn on indications of greater
liberalization.
Proponents of Option III would maintain that to fail to differentiate
clearly in our treatment of Eastern European countries according to
the degree of repressiveness of their regimes would be inconsistent
with our commitment to human rights in general and CSCE objectives
in particular. It would suggest an indifference to the plight of the
different peoples, which could cause us serious domestic political prob-
lems and even loss of support for continuation of the detente process.
Finally, it would represent a failure on our part to utilize the benefits
of improved relations with the US to encourage those regimes with
better records and to inhibit those who do worse. Option III proponents
would hold that withholding our cooperation could, over time, induce
improved performance from the more repressive regimes along the
lines of our CSCE objectives. Since it is likely that US policy can have
only marginal effects on the human rights practices of such regimes,
the Option III approach would at a minimum make clear our continued
disapproval in the absence of such improvement.
Under Option IV, following modification or suspension of Jackson/Vanik,
we would proceed without delay to negotiate trade agreements making MFN
and credits available to both Bulgaria and Czechoslovakia, provided that the
normalization steps noted above had been virtually completed and their behav-
ior on human rights matters was not offensive.
Those favoring Option IV would point out that changes in the
character or behavior of Communist regimes—including their behavior
in human rights—are most likely to come in the context of an evolution-
ary process of detente rather than as a result either of US proffered
cooperation (as a carrot) or of US pressure (as a stick), especially in
the absence of a similar strategy on the part of our Western European
allies. They would emphasize that the basic impulse for greater atten-
tion by the respective regimes to human rights comes from the indige-
nous populace and that the US position should play a supporting role.
To make that role effective will entail steady and persistent pressure
over time and, if US influence is to be effective even in a supplementary
role, the US must be more engaged, more present, and more important
to the regimes. It can achieve this additional involvement through
expansion of cultural and scientific exchanges and other official and
private exchanges, and through greater emphasis to trade promotion.
In their view, an enlarged stake in the US relationship and the interplay

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
possible with a greater US presence could act to induce greater respon-
siveness by the regimes to human rights concerns.
There also is a possible middle course but it would be feasible only after
the problem of extending MFN credits eligibility to these countries has been
overcome in the Congress and once the terms on which we are prepared
to extend MFN and credits prove acceptable to the regimes in question.
In particular, before granting MFN and credit eligibility, we would
insist that such normalization steps as described above had been carried
out; that gross violation of human rights be eliminated; and that at
least some concrete progress in the human rights area be achieved.
Beyond this, we would not insist on far-reaching internal liberalization
before seeking MFN and credit eligibility and engaging ourselves more
actively in the economic area.
For example:
—Bulgaria is a tightly controlled country with bothersome press
coverage. But (largely because of its tight control), it has no visible
dissident problem. And it has been and is being reasonably responsive
on divided families. Thus, absent Jackson/Vanik, we might consider
MFN/credits for Bulgaria.
—Czechoslovakia—Few would hold that the US should be prepared
to grant Czechoslovakia MFN/credits under current conditions: active
repression of human rights advocates, restrictive divided families poli-
cies, attempted precensorship of foreign journalists, and sharp and
intensive press attacks on the US human rights position.
The German Democratic Republic as a Special Case
The GDR is unique in that it is not a traditional national state, as
are the other members of the Warsaw Pact, but an outgrowth of the
Soviet desire to maintain direct control over a substantial portion of
the former German Reich. Further aspects of the GDR’s special position
in Europe are the fact that Berlin is located in the center of its territory,
that the GDR exerts a negative influence on the situation in West Berlin,
and that the GDR is a significant industrial and military power whose
potential is of great importance to the Soviets and the other Warsaw
Pact allies.
US/GDR diplomatic relations were established in 1974 as part of a
package of East-West agreements affecting German matters and general
European security. In agreeing to establish relations, the US deferred
its prior demands for an acceptable consular convention and for the
satisfactory resolution of claims emanating from World War II.
When we established relations, we stipulated three objectives:
(a) to resolve outstanding humanitarian cases; (b) to conclude a satisfac-
tory consular convention; and (c) to obtain a claims settlement, includ-
ing GDR recognition of Jewish claims. Given the complexity of claims

Eastern Europe Region
issues and the fact that it is US registration procedures which are
delaying commencement of talks, we have not made a claims settlement
a condition for specific current movement in relations.
Given the Belgrade CSCE meeting and the keen East German inter-
est in developing its new relationship with the US, especially in the
trade area, the GDR recently has undertaken to clear up all outstanding
US humanitarian cases. However, the consular agreement, which other-
wise is virtually completed, has been tied up over GDR insistence that
the text include specific definition of East German nationality.
Both Options III and IV would still require completion of a consular
agreement before more significant steps could be taken with the GDR. As with
Bulgaria and Czechoslovakia, we would require that gross violations
of human rights be eliminated and that at least some concrete progress
be achieved in the human rights area. Both options also would exclude
MFN/credits eligibility for the GDR prior to conclusion of a satisfactory
consular convention.
The difference between the two options is that Option III would also
require progress in the claims talks as a condition for further movement, while
Option IV would be prepared to move toward progress in other areas before
movement on a claims settlement, the completion of which is liable to
take years.
Proponents of Option III acknowledge the political and industrial
importance of the GDR and share the Option IV wish for the gradual
development of more normal relations with the East German govern-
ment and people. Incremental movement to that end would be accept-
able. But they believe that it would be unwise to move to structure or
formalize our cultural, scientific or commercial relations, or to engage
in political-level visits, before the consular convention were concluded
and until progress also were made toward an acceptable claims agree-
ment. This is because of our previous deferral of the consular and
claims issues and the domestic political ramifications of the claims
issue.
Implementation of Option IV with the GDR would be based on
three assumptions: (a) that both because of its strategic and its industrial
potential, the GDR is a nation which deserves significant American
attention; (b) that the East German desire for recognition and the need
for increased trade with the West provide us with a certain amount of
leverage; and (c) perhaps most importantly, that with a regime as
suspicious and frightened as that of the GDR, taking the initiative to
establish a broader basis from which to conduct relations will over
the long run pay more dividends than a policy of demanding prior
concessions for each forward step. Option IV, while also conditioning
further programs in conclusion of a consular convention would repre-
sent a somewhat more flexible strategy, accepting on a limited basis

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
some of the more “normal” aspects of relations such as increased cul-
tural exchanges, reasonably normal commercial relations and political
level visits without expecting major concessions from the GDR first.
Humanitarian concerns and developments in Berlin would of course
continue to play a role in determining the pace of the development
of relations.
Option IV would thus not mean any major steps forward with the
GDR nor connote any effort by the United States to replace Soviet
influence or destabilize the GDR. It would represent, in view of the
GDR’s strategic importance to us, an effort to move the bilateral rela-
tionship along faster so as to: provide the basis for a long-term US
presence in the GDR; develop a better understanding of it; and, by
giving the GDR’s technologically based industry some stake in the
Western market, give the GDR an additional stake in not raising the
temperature in Berlin.
Implications for trade policy
Option III advocates would stress the leverage on human rights
issues that resides in the decision to expand Eastern European trade.
They would observe that Eastern European regimes place the highest
value on increased economic efficiency and improved living standards
as virtual requisites for relatively stable political situations. These
regimes and their peoples see expanded economic relations with the
West, including the US, as a major avenue toward those priority goals.
But, from the US side, it is pointed out, Eastern European trade is
unlikely to be a significant factor in US foreign trade. The GDR is the
only country that now has significant market possibilities in the West
for its engineering and high technology exports. Consequently, before
opening the doors to expanded trade via MFN/credits, the US should
exert the leverage involved to require greater liberalization by the more
restrictive Eastern European regimes. The US can afford to wait.
Option IV adherents observe that with the more massive imports
of oil the US faces a mounting and continuing problem in achieving a
reasonable balance in its foreign trade. While not a large item in US
foreign trade, Eastern European trade can make some contribution to
the balance of payments (and US employment), as our trade balance
with Eastern Europe has been and is likely to continue to be favorable.
Expanded trade also creates a tangible and increasing stake in contin-
ued good relations with the US and develops broadened contacts and
points of influence which, over time, will make these countries more
conscious of and attentive to our interests, including our human
rights concerns.
This follow-up paper has taken account of the problem of Eastern
European indebtedness discussed in the original PRM–9 study. None-

Eastern Europe Region
theless, we believe the problem of Eastern European indebtedness may
have increasingly important implications, both for our Eastern Euro-
pean policy, and, more generally, for East-West relations. Accordingly,
we recommend that the NSC task State, CIA, Treasury and other perti-
nent agencies to do a further follow-up study on the Eastern European
economic situation in general and the indebtedness problem in particu-
lar. The study should take account of possible Soviet policy options;
appropriate consultations with our allies in the OECD and other West-
ern institutions; and our policy in the IMF. It should set forth appropri-
ate policy recommendations.
Implications for US-Soviet relations
Conduct of our policy toward Eastern European countries bears
on our Soviet relations in (a) its effects on the US-Soviet bilateral rela-
tionship and (b) its effects on the Soviet position in Eastern Europe.
The Soviets are of two minds about US relations with Eastern
European countries. They are apprehensive about the expansion of the
US presence in Eastern Europe for two reasons: because it could tend
to dilute somewhat Soviet influence and control, which are priority
Soviet foreign policy objectives; and because it could tend to deflect
the political and economic development of the Eastern European coun-
tries in a non-Soviet direction with long-range implications for the
Soviet position and security interests in the region. While these pros-
pects are hardly imminent, the Soviets still fear that the US (and West-
ern) influence could contribute to destabilization of some or all of the
region, facing the Kremlin with costly policy choices in the European
area and in the world at large. On the other hand, Moscow also recog-
nizes that the potential for Eastern European instability stems primarily
from resentment from overly tight Soviet control and from the powerful
desires throughout Eastern Europe for an improved economic situation
and a higher standard of living which the Soviet Union itself cannot
provide. The Soviets are also mindful of the political costs of attempting
to deny to Eastern Europe the fruits of detente that the Soviet Union
itself seeks. Finally, Moscow reluctantly recognizes that Eastern Europe
would be less of an economic burden or more of an economic asset if
its economic development were spurred by the Western connection.
Consequently, the Soviet Union accepts the development of limited
Western economic ties in Eastern Europe as a mixed blessing or miti-
gated curse, relying on close monitoring of that development and the
limitations imposed by Eastern Europe’s economic needs and potential
to prevent the destabilizing influence it fears.
With regard to the effects of US policy in Eastern Europe, the
Soviets would probably not be unduly concerned whether we pursued
either Option III or Option IV, calculating that the impact in Eastern

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
Europe would not be very great. On balance, the Soviet Union would
probably consider the net effects on Eastern European stability in the
short run either to roughly balance out or to be of manageable propor-
tions. They could be somewhat more apprehensive over the longer-
term effects of the expanded US contacts and presence inherent in
Option IV, worrying particularly over their effects in the GDR. On
the other hand, the greater emphasis on human rights and autonomy
implicit in Option III is of very great concern to the US. Moreover,
Option III also aims at the development of such expanded contacts
and presence in the longer-term.
West European Attitudes
Our West European allies have by and large pursued the Option
IV approach to relations with Eastern Europe for some time. France
has led the way in seeking to improve relations with East European
countries while the FRG spent most of the early seventies in restabiliz-
ing its diplomatic presence and normalizing long-suspended relations.
However, it is unlikely that the allies would have strong views one
way or the other concerning the US pursuing Option III or IV in its
relations with Eastern Europe. Whatever we do, the allies would be
unlikely to change their own approach.
12.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, August 15, 1977
SUBJECT
Export Control of US Technology
Growing trade from West to East over the past five years has
heightened concern over technology transfer, especially to the Soviet
Union. The adequacy and appropriateness of export controls have been
increasingly called into question by the responsible Executive Agencies,
the Congress and the business community. Some—such as State, Com-
merce, and business—argue that export controls are too stringent. Oth-
Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 91, Export Controls: 1977. Confidential. Sent for
action. While no drafting information appears on the memorandum, it was forwarded to
Brzezinski for signature by Benjamin Huberman on August 4 and retyped on August 15.

Eastern Europe Region
ers—DOD and Congress—maintain that the controls are not suffi-
ciently tight. To provide the basis for sound policy guidance on this
complex and important issue, I recommend that you authorize a PRM
directing a review of our policy on the export control of US technology
The PRM will provide you options for decision on key aspects of
technology transfer policy, such as objectives, criteria, control measures,
and organizational arrangements. The review will also provide the
basis for Executive Branch reports on technology transfer mandated
by recent legislation and for consistent Executive Branch testimony in
upcoming Congressional hearings.
While there is interest in a comprehensive review of all aspects of
technology transfer, all agencies agree that this PRM should focus on
the control of technology, particularly to the Communist countries.
The other key aspect of technology transfer is in the North-South con-
text. Here the issues are promotional rather than restrictive in nature
and involve considerations vastly different from those in the East-West
context. Accordingly, I propose to treat the question of North-South
technology transfer separately and will be submitting a directive on
this for your approval.
RECOMMENDATION
That you authorize me to sign the PRM at Tab I on the export
control of US technology.3
2 See Document 13.
3 Carter approved the recommendation and wrote “ok—Add [Stuart] Eizenstat. J”
at the top of the memorandum. Another note indicates it was done on August 18.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
13.
Presidential Review Memorandum/NSC–311
Washington, August 18, 1977
TO
The Vice President
The Secretary of State
The Secretary of Defense
ALSO
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Secretary of Commerce
The Secretary of Labor
The Secretary of Energy
The Director, Office of Management & Budget
The Chairman, Council of Economic Advisers
The Director, Arms Control & Disarmament Agency
The Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director of Central Intelligence
The Assistant to the President for Domestic Affairs and Policy
The Director, National Science Foundation
The Director, Office of Science & Technology Policy
The Chairman, Nuclear Regulatory Commission
The Administrator, NASA
SUBJECT
Export Control of US Technology
The President has directed that the SCC review our policy on the
export control of US technology transfer to Communist countries. The
review should develop options for Presidential decision concerning
objectives, criteria, control measures, organizational arrangements, and
possible legislative initiatives regarding export control. The review
should provide the basis for reports on these matters called for by
recent legislation and recommend guidelines for US participation in
the upcoming review of the COCOM list.
The review should include:
• An examination of existing policy, criteria and current mecha-
nisms for control of technology transfer and an evaluation of the degree
to which the objectives of such control have been attained.
• An assessment of the military, political, and economic implica-
tions for the US and its allies of technology transfer to the various
Communist states and an evaluation of how trade-offs among these
sified/Declassified PRM and PD/NSC Documents. Confidential.

Eastern Europe Region
factors are and should be made. To place this assessment in perspective,
an evaluation should be carried out of the implications for US of tech-
nology transfer to other industrial and Third World countries.
• An evaluation of which technologies, and in what form, are
most in need of control, together with development of criteria and
recommended procedures for carrying out such control.
• An analysis of the policies of COCOM and non-COCOM supplier
states regarding the transfer of technology to Communist states, includ-
ing the likelihood of obtaining cooperation by other key supplier
countries.
• An assessment of the advantages and disadvantages of establish-
ing varying standards of export control for specific Communist states,
together with development of criteria and procedures for applying
such control.
• Identification of the interaction between export control and US
policies on related issues (non-proliferation, arms transfers, and North-
South technology transfer).
The review should draw on existing PRM responses and other
studies. It will be chaired by Ben Huberman on behalf of the NSC and
OSTP staffs. It should be submitted for discussion by the SCC by
There will be a follow-on interagency study dealing with the use of
US technology transfer as a positive influence in North-South relations.
Zbigniew Brzezinski
2 No Presidential Decision was drafted out of the PRM. The PRM report, finalized
in March 1978, called for the creation of an NSC Technology Transfer group to deal
with technology transfer issues and coordinate administration policies. The PRM recom-
mended that the policy continue as set, evolving toward increasing control over sensitive
technologies and associated end products. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs,
Staff Material, Europe, USSR, and East/West, Putnam Subject File, Box 30, East-West
Huberman of the National Security Council Staff circulated an action plan for implemen-
tation of PRM 31. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, General

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
14.
Summary of Conclusions of a Presidential Review
Committee Meeting1
SUBJECT
Policy toward Eastern Europe
PARTICIPANTS
State
Defense
Warren Christopher
Harold Brown
Matthew Nimetz
Walter Slocombe
Richard Vine
General George Brown (JCS)
CIA
NSC
Stansfield Turner
Zbigniew Brzezinski
Robert Bowie
David Aaron
Robert Hunter
Gregory F. Treverton
1. Christopher indicated the purpose of the meeting was to refine
the choice between the two options discussed at the previous PRC
meeting on Europe:2 Option 3—giving preference to those Eastern
European countries that are either relatively liberal internally or rela-
tively independent internationally; and Option 4—abandoning any
implicit rank ordering and seeking to expand contacts and relations
across the board to the extent feasible.
2. Brzezinski emphasized U.S. objectives, arguing that Option 3
would not cause Eastern European states to become more independent
or liberal but that overt support for countries that have achieved a meas-
ure of one or the other would shore up their positions. By contrast,
Option 4 would conduce merely to attempt to promote good relations
and might diminish the special stake that Romania, Poland and Hun-
gary have in their relations with the United States. Secretary Brown
noted that pursuit of U.S. objectives should be limited by the need not
to provoke something like the Hungarian uprising of 1956. Brzezinski
agreed that our objectives should be pursued by working through
existing governments.
3. Nimetz noted that the previous NSDM on Eastern Europe had
established such a firm rank order and time-table that it prevented
taking advantage of opportunities that arose. Christopher suggested
that there might be times when the U.S. would want to move forward
21. Secret; Sensitive. The meeting took place in the White House Situation Room.
2 See Document 6.

Eastern Europe Region
in relations with a particular country in advance of demonstrable
progress on their parts along either of the two criteria. Vine suggested
that our interests in limiting the GDR’s mischief in Berlin might call
for a more forthcoming U.S. attitude.
4. Aaron and Nimetz stressed that the main point was to underscore
the special status of Romania, Poland and Hungary, not to prevent
limited improvements in relations with the other three countries. Brze-
zinski outlined the three areas of U.S. policy: atmospherics (visits),
economics (MFN) and scientific and other exchanges; all agreed that
those instruments are very limited. Aaron thought it might be prefer-
able to rank concrete manifestations of policy, not countries. Secretary
Brown agreed, noting that, for instance, a port visit by the U.S. Navy
in Bulgaria should not be ruled out.
5. In the end there was general support for the following reformula-
tion of Option 3: the U.S. would give demonstrably greater support
for those countries that have achieved a measure of independence or
internal liberalization (Romania, Hungary and Poland). Within that
context, it would be appropriate to develop a scenario for returning
the Crown of St. Stephen to Hungary. However, Option 3 would not
preclude improvements in U.S. relations with the other three (Bulgaria,
Czechoslovakia and the GDR), provided those improvements were tangibly
and demonstrably in the U.S. interest. Negotiations of claim agreements
could continue, but the results would have to be assessed on their own
merits, case by case. Efforts could continue to normalize our relations
with the GDR, bringing them into line with Czechoslovakia, provided
that effort did not dilute the basic differentiation.
6. There was general agreement that our European Allies, especially
the FRG, have somewhat different interests in Eastern Europe than our
own. No purpose would be served by exhorting them to adopt a posture
identical to ours.
7. There was consensus that our policy toward Eastern Europe and
toward CSCE should have parallel objectives. Both should promote
modest steps toward re-joining the two halves of Europe, not as a
threat to the Soviet Union but as an improvement in the security and
life quality of all Europe.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
15.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, September 9, 1977
SUBJECT
Policy Toward Eastern Europe
The PRC met on August 23 to review our policy toward Eastern
Europe.2
The meeting resulted in a general agreement that the United States
basic objectives in Eastern Europe are: (1) to enhance the international inde-
pendence of the region’s states; and (2) to increase their ability to organize
their societies in ways different from the Soviet Union. There are, of course,
limits to our capacity to realize these aims; for example, we do not
want to take actions which might provoke another Hungarian uprising.
On the other hand, our ability to influence events in Eastern Europe
is very limited; what we can do is demonstrably support those countries
that have achieved a measure of international independence or internal
liberalization.
As a result of the discussions, it was agreed to give preference to
those countries that have met these criteria (Poland, Romania and
Hungary).3 This approach would imply moving forward with a sce-
nario for returning the Crown of St. Stephen to Hungary. (A recommen-
dation for your approval will be prepared by the Department of State.)
U.S. relations with the other three countries (Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia
and the GDR) would remain limited until they had demonstrated
progress toward one of the criteria. Negotiations to “normalize” formal
diplomatic relations (consular relations, claims settlements, and the
like) could continue with those countries, but the results would have
to be justified on their own merits. Other specific steps to advance U.S.
relations with those countries (a port visit by the U.S. Navy to Bulgaria
was one step mentioned in the PRC) would have to be justified on
similar grounds—as tangibly advancing specific U.S. interests.
Warren Christopher expressed concern that any general policy
would not unduly limit our flexibility to act when opportunities arise,
and you may want to hear Cy’s view. I believe the draft Presidential
21. Secret; Sensitive. Sent for action. Carter initialed the memorandum indicating he had
seen it. The memorandum was drafted by Treverton on August 24 and redrafted on
September 2 to incorporate Aaron’s suggestions.
2 See Document 14.
3 Brzezinski underlined “Poland, Romania and Hungary” in this sentence.

Eastern Europe Region
Directive (Tab A)4 takes that concern into account. Any greater flexibil-
ity would dilute the basic differentiation which I believe serves our
fundamental objectives; a more flexible general posture would leave
those who implement policy free to pursue their natural affinity for
better relations with host governments, whatever their stripe.
We all agree that over the long term, our policy toward Eastern
Europe and CSCE serve parallel objectives. Both should promote, in a
modest way commensurate with our influence in the region, the re-
joining of the two halves of Europe,5 not as a threat to the Soviet Union
but as a means of enhancing the security and way of life of all Europe.
RECOMMENDATION:
That you sign the Presidential Directive at Tab A.
4 Not attached. A handwritten notation below the recommendation reads: “signed
5 Brzezinski underlined “re-joining of the two halves of Europe” in this sentence.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
16.
Presidential Directive/NSC–211
Washington, September 13, 1977
TO
The Vice President
The Secretary of State
The Secretary of Defense
ALSO
The Secretary of the Treasury
The United States Representative to the United Nations
The Director, Office of Management and Budget
The Chairman, Council of Economic Advisors
The Director, Arms Control and Disarmament Agency
The Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director of Central Intelligence
SUBJECT
Policy toward Eastern Europe (C)
The President has directed that policy toward Eastern Europe
should be based on the objectives of working with governments of the
region to enhance their independence internationally and to increase
their degree of internal liberalization. To that end, the United States
will demonstrably show its preference for Eastern European countries
that are either relatively liberal internally or relatively independent
internationally.
For the principal countries of the region (excluding Yugoslavia),
this policy will reflect the following general guidance:
—Poland and Romania will continue to receive preferred treatment
with regard to visits by government officials, and in handling economic
issues and various exchange programs. We should examine ways to
ameliorate the Polish debt situation, should it continue.
—Relations with Hungary will be carefully improved to demon-
strate that its position is similar to Poland and Romania. The United
States will indicate its willingness to return the Crown of St. Stephen,
providing the Hungarians will give acceptable assurances about its
continuing display. Subsequent to the return of the Crown, the United
States will enter into negotiations for a trade agreement with Hungary,
including a provision for a waiver of the Jackson-Vanik amendment,
21. Secret; Sensitive.

Eastern Europe Region
provided Hungary gives adequate assurances consistent with the spirit
of the Jackson-Vanik provision.
—Relations with Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia and the GDR will
remain limited until there is demonstrated progress along one of the
two dimensions mentioned above. No particular initiatives toward any
of the three will be taken, nor will there be indications of willingness
to grant MFN. That does not preclude continuing efforts to put formal
bilateral relations in a somewhat more normal basis: e.g., through US
naval port visits to Bulgaria, or through negotiations with Bulgaria
over outstanding bond debts, with Czechoslovakia over nationalization
claims and with the GDR over a consular convention and claims. The
results of such negotiations must be justified on their own merits, and
must not dilute the basic differentiation. Any other specific steps taken
to improve U.S. relations with those three countries must tangibly and
demonstrably advance specific U.S. interests.
This policy is aimed at producing stability, progress and the
enhancement of security throughout the region, pointing toward recon-
ciliation between both halves of Europe.
Jimmy Carter
17.
Memorandum From Paul Henze of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, November 18, 1977
SUBJECT
Stepped-up Covert/Overt Activities Targeted at Eastern Europe and the USSR
Last February, when State expressed reservations about continua-
tion of CIA’s meager covert operations directed at the USSR and Eastern
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
Europe, you suggested State study overt possibilities while, meanwhile,
CIA consider modest expansion of selected activities.2
State did nothing. CIA, suffering from internal confusion, was slow
to move but during the course of the summer came up with a number
of proposals for expansion. Five CIA papers were reviewed by the
on three but two proposals dealing with expansion of existing programs
for publishing and distributing books and periodicals for Eastern
Europe and the USSR were put in final form and submitted to the SCC
on 26 October, when they were approved.4 CIA is going ahead with
this expansion. State continues to be unenthusiastic about it.
The recently appointed Deputy Assistant Secretary for East Euro-
pean Affairs, Bill Luers, was present at the 5 October SCC/SAWG
meeting and took it upon himself to promise a serious State investiga-
tion of possibilities for overt activity targeted against Eastern Europe
and the USSR. This was the first he had heard of your request to State
last winter, by the way, which confirms our impression that State’s
persistent arguing against covert programs on the basis that these
things could be done overtly is, in practical terms, nothing more than
a tactic for bringing everything to a halt. Luers, however, is not of this
view. He is an admirer of what CIA has done over the past 25 years,
an enthusiastic supporter of RFE/RL and deeply knowledgeable of
Eastern Europe. He would seriously like to see State energize the gov-
ernment to broaden activity. He also shares our view, which few others
in State do, that the covert programs should be continued and
expanded—not curtailed or abandoned in expectation that something
might eventually be done overtly.
wanted “to see movement on this program, not necessarily expansion of only covert
things, but also new overt initiatives.” Representing the Department, INR Director Harold
Saunders said that the Department “found themselves really not in favor of expansion,
either covert or overt.” Aaron directed the Central Intelligence Agency and the Depart-
ment to prepare papers on the subject dealing with the covert and overt areas and
coordinate them with the NSC Staff, highlighting the policy issues. (National Security
Council, Carter Administration Intelligence Files, Box I–020, Minutes—SCC Special
Activities Working Group, 1977)
which recommended that “proposals on expansion of book publication and distribution
to Eastern Europe and the USSR will be recommended, with some refinements, for
approval by the SCC.” The SAWG also recommended that CIA proposals for covert
action on certain human rights initiatives and Soviet nationalities be rewritten and that
the Department of State clarify U.S. policy affecting these proposals. (Ibid.)
4 On October 25, Henze informed Brzezinski of the agenda for the upcoming SCC
meeting, dealing with items on which a decision was not taken at the October 6 SCC
meeting, including approval of the expansion of book publishing and distribution pro-
grams for the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe. (Ibid.)

Eastern Europe Region
You will recall I told you I planned to work closely with Luers to
encourage him. I spent an hour with him yesterday (17 November)
reviewing what he has managed to do so far. He is less gung-ho than
he was when he took on this responsibility in early October, because
he has found roadblocks in his path at every turn—but he intends to
persist, and I believe we should continue to help him.
One of the principal roadblocks is INR, which is making an enor-
mous production of the simple things Luers wants to do, as exemplified
by the attached paper (TAB A)5 addressed to the SCC/SAWG which
INR sent to me this week. It asks for SCC Working Group review
and authorization for what Luers is trying to do—simple exploratory
actions. It is also filled with a whole series of negative statements about
existing CIA programs and appears, at several points, to be, in effect,
a protest against the fact that the SCC has already authorized expansion
of publishing and distribution activity. State’s profound lack of enthusi-
asm for all activity in this field comes through almost every line of this
paper. (I have marked certain striking passages in red.) As a foretaste
of future State negatism, we are told that State has doubts about any
use of emigre organizations and is doing a review of what policy toward
nationalities should be. (I hear that State—perhaps even Luers—feels
that nothing should be done in respect to non-Russian nationalities at
all. But it remains to be seen whether they will take this negative a
position formally.)
I told Luers yesterday that I saw no need to have an SCC/SAWG
review of the actions he wishes to take—these are not covert activities.
I said your request last winter that these “overt options” be explored
constituted all the clearance needed at the NSC level. I added that the
kinds of things he wants to look into have been open to exploration
for nearly 30 years. The fact that no one outside of CIA has ever taken
much initiative does not prove that it cannot be done—but it naturally
leaves one doubtful that much will be accomplished. Nevertheless, I
reiterated, you were very eager to see this effort made and I was ready
to support it. Luers will try and may even succeed in getting something
going—but I doubt very much that he will be able to develop anything
that could be regarded as a substitute for much that CIA is doing
covertly.
Some specific thoughts on his proposed initiatives (pp. 3–4 of
TAB A):
a. USIA: I see no legal barriers to some increased USIA activity,
though it obviously can go no farther than “gray” areas and cannot
engage in covert funding or covert distribution.
5 Not attached.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
b. I do not think the BIB should be involved at all; it has enough
to do keeping the radios going. Perhaps in years ahead, it might take
on publications tasks . . . but these were all segmented out of the
radios when they went under the BIB. Putting them back would invite
congressional problems.
c. State, especially under its external research authorization, could
undertake some activity legally, I believe—but without some imagina-
tive person to push it continually, I doubt that it could add up to much.
d. It may be possible for the National Endowments for the Arts
and the Humanities to engage in marginal activity directed toward
Eastern Europe and the USSR (I have a very constructive relationship
with the Arts Endowment, as you know) but they have legal restrictions
and the problem that they are basically domestically oriented, not
foreign affairs operating agencies.
e. American publishers might do something . . . but talk is not
likely to be matched by much money.
f. Other private funding sources need to be explored—something
can be turned up, I am sure, but it will take a lot of consistent work.
The most hopeful thing Luers had to say was that he thought he
had a good chance of getting Abe Brumberg detailed to him for a
period of several months (perhaps longer) to work on this problem.
Having a dynamic and motivated man such as Abe working on these
tasks is about the only hope there is that anything could be done.
I propose that we not have an SCC/SAWG discussion of this sub-
ject6 and that I send INR a short memorandum stating that we consider
review of State’s (i.e. Luers’) proposed initiatives unnecessary since
they already have all the authority they need to do so.
Do you AGREE
DISAGREE?7
6 In the December 15 SAWG meeting, Aaron again stressed to the Department of
State representatives that the White House “expected initiative from the State Department
in exploring overt and private possibilities for support of activities directed at the USSR and
Eastern Europe.” He reminded the Department that it had agreed to produce proposals
as early as May, and “questioned whether State was allocating enough energy to this
effort,” asking that they focus on generating new activity. He continued: “If new activities
proved viable, then they might eventually replace or take over some of the CIA opera-
tions.” (National Security Council, Carter Administration Intelligence Files, Box I–020,
Minutes—SCC Special Activities Working Group, 1977)
7 Brzezinski did not mark either option. However, on December 6, Henze sent a
memorandum to INR Director William Bowdler stating that Brzezinski “has reviewed
your paper and has concluded that the subject does not require new action by the SCC/
SAWG at the present time.” Stressing that CIA operations were undergoing separate
review, Henze wrote that “the exploration of possibilities for new or increased overt
activity can be conducted by the State Department without any necessity for new policy
authorization.” Henze also noted that the White House, through Aaron, had reiterated
that point in the October 5 SAWG: “At this stage at least, the explorations which the
State Department is undertaking should not be directed toward finding alternate sources
of support or funding for existing CIA activities, but should concentrate on new or
parallel activities which could be overtly supported by the U.S. Government, if reliable
funding arrangements can be made, or financed through private sources.” (Carter Library,

Eastern Europe Region
18.
Paper Prepared by the National Security Council Staff for
Eastern European Affairs1
Washington, undated
ANNUAL REPORT
EASTERN EUROPE
At the end of 1976 US relations with the countries of Eastern Europe
were at a generally low ebb. The previous Administration tended to
see policy toward these countries as a corollary of that followed toward
the USSR. The effects of the leaking of Helmut Sonnenfeldt’s comments2
on Eastern Europe had not been completely erased, and President
Ford’s comments on Eastern Europe during the television debate3 fur-
ther reinforced the feeling that little concern and attention was devoted
to Eastern Europe.4
The goals toward the countries of this region were established in
the course of the PRM–9 review5 of Relations with Europe and were
established in PD–216 which established that policy toward Eastern
Europe should be aimed at enhancing the international independence
and internal liberalization of these countries and that the US should
show its preference for countries moving in that direction. This implies
preferred treatment for Poland and Romania, which had received spe-
cial attention in the past, and for Hungary. Relations with Bulgaria,
21 covering memorandum from the Soviet/Eastern Europe NSC Staff to Brzezinski,
which dealt with U.S. policy toward the Soviet Union. Brzezinski wrote “King” at the
top of the paper, indicating that it should be returned to Robert King. Portions of this
paper (see subsequent footnotes) were included in “NSC Report for 1977: A Critical Self-
ment of State Helmut Sonnenfeldt at a gathering of the European Chiefs of Mission in
London. When Sonnenfeldt’s remarks leaked to the press in January 1976, critics charged
that the United States condoned Soviet domination of Eastern Europe. See Foreign
ment 14.
and Governor Carter in which Ford, responding to a question as to whether signing the
Helsinki Agreement codified Soviet domination of Eastern Europe, stated “there is no
Soviet domination of Eastern Europe, and there never will be under a Ford Administra-
4 Brzezinski highlighted this paragraph in the margin.
5 See Document 1.
6 See Document 16.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
Czechoslovakia, and the GDR are to remain limited until progress is
demonstrated in international or internal policy. Yugoslavia remains
a special case deserving particular attention.
American interest in Poland was reaffirmed by the President’s visit
and the Poles were given further evidence of US concern by the credits
for agricultural purchases that were granted and further steps were
taken to help them in dealing with their economic problems.7
Among the specific goals that were enumerated was the return of
the Crown of St Stephen to Hungary to be followed by the negotiation
of a trade agreement granting MFN.8 The decision was made to return
the Crown, satisfactory details were worked out for the transfer, and
a Presidential delegation accompanied the Crown and relics to Buda-
pest for the ceremony. The effect on the Hungarian population and
government has been and will continue to be extremely favorable for
the United States. The one criticism that can be leveled is the way in
which it was carried out. The leaking of the decision to return the
Crown, of course, created problems. The fact that a public announce-
ment did not follow the leaks in the press gave ammunition to domestic
opponents of the return and led some to conclude that the decision
was being reconsidered when in fact it was only a question of working
out a suitable time. Postponing the public announcement also caused
some problems with the hill and gave Congressional opponents the
opportunity to raise the issue with the courts. At the same time, how-
ever, the delay allowed Hungarian-Americans to supply input into the
scenario for return and this may have had beneficial domestic political
consequences.
Initial steps have also been taken to prepare a draft of the trade
agreement with Hungary. Returning the Crown has been the focus of
attention but progress should be made early next year on the agreement.
The Hungarians have already been informed of the assurances they
will be required to provide under Jackson-Vanik and this should be
settled before negotiations begin.
The one country in Eastern Europe which seems to have been
neglected is Romania. In the past they were given very favorable consid-
eration, but under the present Administration they appear to have
slipped in importance.9 Poland is the first East European country to
receive a visit from the new President; the US is returning the Crown
to Hungary; Ceausescu’s visit is scheduled after that of Tito. Although
Romania’s human rights record is in need of improvement, it is the
7 Brzezinski highlighted this paragraph in the margin.
8 Brzezinski highlighted this sentence in the margin.
9 Brzezinski highlighted this sentence in the margin.

Eastern Europe Region
Warsaw Pact state that has clearly demonstrated the greatest degree
of independence from the Soviet Union.
In the coming year there will probably be several opportunities
for furthering the goals that have been set for Eastern Europe—negotia-
tion of the trade agreement with Hungary (though we may have prob-
lems with the timing of this since it will require Congressional approval
and other administration priorities and the approach of mid-term elec-
tions may cause delays); the visit of Romanian President Ceausescu;
and possibilities to expand trade relations and economic cooperation.
19.
Memorandum for the Record1
Washington, March 1, 1978
SUBJECT
Conversation with Dr. Brzezinski, 28 February 1978
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to Eastern Europe.]
4. Along with Bob Bowie we had considerable discussion on the
desirability of increasing [less than 1 line not declassified] in FY 78. Brze-
zinski approved the idea of taking it up in the SCC. What he would
like is to try to put some distance between the covert action proposal
and [1 line not declassified]. Could we:
a. Have a new Presidential Finding to “promote political change” in
the Eastern European and Soviet Union areas; and [1 line not declassified]
b. Get the State Department or USIA to undertake this on an
overt basis?
c. [2 lines not declassified]
5. Before we take this up with the SCC, we need a more definitive
statement as to:
a. Where the [dollar amount not declassified] is actually being
spent today.
Job 05S00620R, Administrative Files, Schedules of Daily Activities, DCI and DDCI (Turner

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
b. What kind of groups does it go to? Are they mainly emigre
groups? Brzezinski noted one by a man named [name not declassified]
that he thought was good.
c. Does some of it go to Western European groups as opposed to
emigre groups?
d. We also need to be as specific as we can as to how the additional
funding would be employed, again with emphasis on whether it’s to
emigre groups or established Western European groups.
[Omitted here is information unrelated to Eastern Europe.]
Stansfield Turner
Director
20.
Memorandum From Paul Henze of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, March 14, 1978
SUBJECT
Russian and East European Book Program—CIA Report
Admiral Turner has sent you a memo (TAB B)2 reporting that the
SCC recommendations of last fall on expansion of Russian and East
European book publishing are being implemented. A total of [dollar
amount not declassified] is going to be allocated to increased book publica-
tion and distribution in 1978 (FY). State has approved the main lines
of the Agency program and there seems, as of the moment, to be no
difficulty in carrying out the CIA program.
This represents very effective performance by CIA at a time of
stress and confusion in the DDO.3 I have drafted a little memo from
2 Dated March 13. Not attached.
3 In a March 23 memorandum to Brzezinski, Henze described the “persistent” and
“mistaken” philosophy of using covert action only as a last resort. “Stan Turner,” Henze
wrote, “gives the impression of greater covert capabilities than CIA actually possesses. This
may be in part because he is reluctant to admit the damage his personnel policies have
done to the DDO.” Scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XXVIII,
Organization and Management of Foreign Policy.

Eastern Europe Region
you to the Admiral giving them a pat on the back. It also establishes
a requirement for reporting to us on what has been accomplished as
of 1 September so the program can again be reviewed this coming fall.
RECOMMENDATION:
That you sign the attached Memorandum (TAB A).4
4 Attached but not printed. The draft memorandum reads: “I am pleased to note
from your memorandum that this program has moved ahead successfully. It represents
good fulfillment of the SCC recommendation of 26 October 1977, approved by the
President on 1 November 1977. I would like to have a progress report on this program
that Brzezinski signed the memorandum. An unidentified handwritten note at the bottom
of the covering memorandum indicates that action was suspended.
21.
Paper Prepared by William Odom of the National Security
Council Staff for the East-West Planning Group1
Washington, undated
EAST EUROPE IN THE CONTEXT OF U.S.-SOVIET RELATIONS
The United States2 has four general options in its approach to the
Soviet Bloc. First, it can pursue a more cooperative3 relationship with
memorandum to Brzezinski, Samuel Huntington, and Reginald Bartholomew, Odom
wrote: “The attached paper is an effort to provide an analytical framework for a discussion
of East Europe in the context of U.S.-Soviet relations on March 21. It is a product hastily
done this past week with the idea of treating another major area in the context of U.S.-
Soviet relations the way we discussed China at the last meeting. Is there an ‘East European
card’? If so, how can it be played?”
2 The West European states are not given separate attention in this discussion of
U.S. policy options for two reasons. First, space in a short paper does not allow. Second,
the U.S., if it moves firmly in either direction of cooperative or competitive relations
with the Soviet Union, can force the Europeans to follow the general trend. Admittedly,
in the middle ground, where there is a more even mix of competition and cooperation,
this is less true, but some of the implications for the West European role in those cases
are discussed. [Footnote is in the original.]
3 “Cooperation” can be thought of in three broad categories: 1) economic, technologi-
cal, and cultural; 2) political; 3) arms control. In the matrix here, the first category is the
major kind of cooperation meant in defining the options. The discussion following should
clarify the relationship to political cooperation. [Footnote is in the original.]

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
both Moscow and the East European states. Second, it can pursue a
more cooperative relationship with Moscow while not emphasizing a
cooperative approach to Eastern Europe. Third, it can pursue a coopera-
tive relationship toward Eastern European states while de-emphasizing
the cooperative approach to Moscow. Fourth, it can de-emphasize coop-
eration with both Moscow and Eastern Europe. These analytical distinc-
tions can be arrayed as follows:
Similar Policies
Different Policies
toward Moscow
toward Moscow and
and East Europe
East Europe
More Cooperative
1/Toward Moscow
2/Toward Moscow but
and East Europe
not East Europe
Less Cooperative
4/Toward Moscow
3/Toward Moscow but
and East Europe
not East Europe
Our real policy choices, to be sure, are not so tidy. This framework,
nonetheless, can help us think about some of the causal relations within
the real choices. To some extent, we have pursued all of these variants
at one time or another in the last three decades. Although they are set
down with excessive sharpness here, that sharpness clarifies an inher-
ent ambivalence about goals in U.S. policy. On the one hand, there is
a desire to loosen the Soviet grip on East European states; on the other
hand, there has been a recurring desire for detente with Moscow. Even
in the high time of the cold war, the United States was reluctant to go
all the way in helping an East European state escape the confines of
the Warsaw Pact. In the high time of the most recent detente period,
the U.S. did not wholly ignore differences between Moscow and East
Europe that were exploitable for loosening Soviet control, but it did
go quite far in giving the impression that we would not work very
hard toward loosening the grip, presumably because that could deny
us the larger fruits of cooperation with Moscow.
A number of arguments for and against can be provided for each
of the four options in the matrix. The following ones should be taken
merely as suggestive pros and cons for starting the discussion.
1. Emphasize cooperation with both Moscow and East Europe.
The justification for this approach could be that it tends to loosen
authoritarian control in all members of the Soviet Bloc by setting in
motion economic, social, and finally political change, which presum-
ably will benefit the West. This approach assumes that political factors
are driven by economic and social considerations even to the point of
systemic transformation, albeit in a slow evolutionary process.
The objection to this approach is that political factors can and
probably do set firm limits to the evolutionary process. Furthermore,

Eastern Europe Region
the economic and technological assistance gained through cooperation
may allow the Soviet leadership to avoid, delay, and limit reforms
which otherwise might be forced on an unwilling Soviet leadership.
In other words, this approach is more likely to block than facilitate
evolutionary change.
2. Emphasize a more cooperative relationship with Moscow while not
emphasizing a cooperative approach toward East Europe.
This is what many understood—wrongly or rightly—to be the
Sonnenfeldt doctrine. Its assumption is that interests in the world order,
if commonly shared by Washington and Moscow, take precedence over
detaching East Europe from the Soviet Bloc. Its proponents might argue
that cooperation with Moscow must come first, loosening up that
regime, which is a pre-condition for significant political liberalization
in East Europe.
Its critics could argue that it, like the first approach, merely allows
Moscow to evade reforms through exploiting Western economic and
technological assistance and at the same time to prevent significant
loosening of its hegemony in East Europe. It makes the Washington-
Moscow relationship look like a super-power coalition against which
an East European state like Romania, for example, has an increasingly
difficult time playing its maverick role. Nor can the neutrals be sure
that their policies will not be the victim of a Moscow-Washington
understanding. Finally, the West Europeans find that they can take
European security less seriously because the U.S.-Soviet relationship
ensures it. West Europeans are left free to pursue whatever policy lines
they choose without as much concern for building a NATO policy
consensus.
3. Emphasize cooperation with Eastern Europe but not with Moscow.
The case for this policy would be that it promises to exacerbate
Soviet control problems by creating alternative sources of support for
East European regimes over a long evolutionary period. At the same
time, it would deny the USSR the benefits of economic and technologi-
cal assistance and whatever relief that could provide the leadership.
The Politburo would face not only growing independence in East
Europe but also sharpened dilemmas between political control and
efficient use of human and material resources within the Soviet
economy.
The objection to this approach might be that the fruits of coopera-
tion—especially economic interaction—would not stop in East Europe
but would filter through to Moscow in any event. Furthermore, eco-
nomic assistance to East Europe would alleviate some of the tensions
created there by consumer dissatisfaction and inefficient resource allo-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
cations. Finally, it could sharpen the Soviet fear of political evolution
in East Europe and perhaps bring greater Soviet repression.
4. De-emphasize cooperation with both the Soviet Union and Eastern
Europe.
The rationale of this option could be that denying—or merely
impeding—the flow of economic assistance and technology transfers
sharpens the reform issues in the Soviet political system more quickly
and critically than would increasing economic interaction. Thus, by
reducing the role of Eastern Europe as a conduit of technology to the
Soviet Union, the U.S. could increase the internal Soviet pressures for
change. At the same time, this approach should reduce the Soviet
capabilities and pursue a competitive foreign policy with military and
economic means.
Among the arguments against this approach, it may be insisted
that U.S. policy cannot significantly restrain the diffusion of technology
and economic interaction in the world, and, therefore, the Soviet Union
will find other sources, notwithstanding U.S. reluctance to provide
them. Such a competitive stance by the U.S. might also prompt a more
aggressive Soviet use of its military power in winning the diplomatic
and political leverage in non-European areas. Moscow might also pur-
sue a less moderate role in European affairs by creating periodic crises
and indulging in spoiling diplomatic tactics wherever possible.
The security policy corollary to these four options
Each of these options is based on different assumptions about the
nature of change in the Soviet Bloc. Changes inevitably are accompa-
nied by uncertainties, uncertainties which both Eastern and Western
political leaders desire to reduce or eliminate. In other words, they
want predictable change as long as it is also controllable for their own
purposes. Military power provides one of the more important means
for dealing with the political uncertainties and for controlling and
limiting processes of political change.
The policy options that promise more economic change in the
prompt and allow the Soviet leadership to maintain a dynamic and
comprehensive military establishment. That kind of Soviet policy in
turn is most likely to stimulate larger U.S. military programs. If de-
emphasizing cooperation and economic interaction (Option 4) is effec-
tive, it should make it more difficult for the USSR to support large
military outlays, and it should constrain the Soviet capability for
projecting its military power abroad.
U.S. military power for the non-cooperative approach (Option 4)
could eventually be a limited security posture, something like mini-

Eastern Europe Region
mum deterrence, but initially it might require an intimidating military
posture. If the U.S. is prepared to stand aside and let change within
the Soviet Bloc take its course, then military forces are necessary only
for preventing disorderly developments from spilling into Western
Europe. If, however, the U.S. wants to have some influence on the
direction of change in the Bloc, then a larger military backdrop is
needed for U.S. policy in Europe, both East and West.
For Option 3, a stronger military posture is required if it is to be
a serious strategy for loosening the Soviet grip. A large NATO military
backdrop during the Czech crisis of 1968 could conceivably have kept
the uncertainties for the Politburo sufficiently high to have produced
a compromise between Dubcek and Moscow of long-term durability
allowing the Prague spring to yield fruit in the fall. The deployment
of U.S. forces in Southeast Asia, the general disrepair in the U.S. forces in
Europe, and the willingness of the Johnson Administration to reassure
Moscow by taking Soviet military observers along the FRG-Czech bor-
der so that they could verify the absence of NATO military activities—
all of these things contributed to Soviet confidence that the U.S. had
neither the military means nor the intention to influence the course of
events in Prague. Had the U.S. made even moderate military gestures
such as slightly increasing routine military exercises, the Soviet decision
to send forces into Czechoslovakia might never have been made.
Today there are again signs of change and transformation in East
Europe. In particular, we have seen the continuation of the working
class movement in Poland, and perhaps surprising to some observers
in the West, dissidence in East Germany has reached distressing levels
for the SED leadership.
In the case of Poland, can the present U.S. policy of economic and
diplomatic support for Warsaw turn the processes of change to the
purposes of the West? Or are we simply helping the Soviets avoid the
price of more open and perhaps violent means of repression? Is it true,
as some intelligence analysts recently argued, that Moscow is unaware
of the explosive situation in Poland? Or is Moscow aware that we are
aware and willing to bail the Poles out with credits? It seems difficult
to conclude that the forces of change are necessarily favoring the West.
The East German case is not only more complex but of much
greater consequence. It is not primarily about a state in Eastern Europe
but about Germany as a whole. Moscow seems bent on exploiting
Bonn’s Ostpolitik to draw the FRG back into the traditional German
“middle” position, ambivalent about both East and West Europe. With-
out suggesting that a new Rapallo is at hand, it is nonetheless possible
to argue that Bonn finds itself uncomfortable with the West and without
recompense in the East. This is the result of three interacting
developments:

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
—The re-emergence of German economic and military power with-
out corresponding political power (or responsibility).
—The crisis in Ostpolitik which has failed to produce the kind
of results promised either in inter-German relations or in relations
with Moscow.
—Uncertainties and pressures created by U.S. policy toward Mos-
cow and Europe, both security policy and economic policy.
There are at the same time signs of dissent and broader unrest in
the GDR than many have believed before, but Soviet force deployments
there make it virtually inconceivable that unapproved deals between
the two Germanies can be more than ephemeral episodes.
Both of these cases, Poland and East Germany, force us to review
once again Eastern Europe in the context of U.S.-Soviet relations.
22.
Minutes of a Meeting of the East-West Planning Group1
Washington, March 21, 1978
EAST-WEST PLANNING GROUP MEETING
MINUTES OF MARCH 21, 1978
A paper prepared by Colonel Odom served as the point of depar-
ture for discussing Eastern Europe in the context of US-Soviet relations.2
In light of the previous meeting at which China had been discussed
in this same vein, Colonel Odom posed two issues: Is there an “East
European card”? If so, how can it be played?
In the ensuing discussion, a number of objectives of and constraints
on U.S. policy toward Eastern Europe were raised. Specifically, it was
suggested, U.S. policy should do three things:
1. Encourage greater autonomy, through multilateral means when-
ever possible.
2. Ease the repressiveness of many East European regimes.
memorandum from Samuel Huntington to Brzezinski, Bartholomew, Odom, Shulman,
Luers, Robert Bowie, and Arnold Horelick.
2 See Document 21.

Eastern Europe Region
3. Direct efforts toward moderate change while avoiding frontal
confrontation.
It has been the U.S. practice to favor regimes in Eastern Europe if
they balance greater autonomy with the retention of stability, even
though the domestic policies of these regimes are hardly compatible
with American political values. The delicacy of the autonomy/stability
balance means that we cannot play an “East European card” as we
might with China. We must understand why we are doing what we
are doing, even if we can not do much. Because the balance is delicate,
we must keep our “tight-rope” act in mind and not demand too much
clarity in an ambiguous situation.
U.S. policies will inevitably contribute to occasional confrontational
situations between Eastern Europe and the SU. We will help to exacer-
bate both Eastern European-Soviet and internal East European tension.
There will be sporadic periods of tension vis-a-vis Eastern Europe as
a permanent backdrop to U.S. policy-making.
The paper prepared for the meeting did not set down specific goals
for U.S. policy. A simple matrix of possible U.S. interactions with the
Soviets and East Europeans presented four different mixes of coopera-
tion and competition. Some illustrative pros and cons for each mix
were used to call attention to the key assumptions underlying policy
rationale for each. The brevity of the paper was useful in stimulating
review of alternative US/SU/East European relationships, but most
discussants thought it made the assumptions appear too stark, and
without the nuance that, as it turned out, most thought characterize
US-East European relations.
Viable, coherent policy alternatives toward Eastern Europe were
felt to be difficult to develop because of both domestic and international
constraints. Although it was agreed that at the extremes of policy
Western Europe is obliged to follow the U.S. lead, it was also felt
that we are presently in the middle ground and therefore much less
influential in shifting the mix of cooperation and competition. For
example, European East-West trade is much larger than US-East Euro-
pean trade. Consumerism is a much larger issue in East Europe than
in the SU, and East European politics are more sensitive to economic
pressures. The relatively small US-East European trade will thus proba-
bly be translated into low political influence where consumerism is
concerned.
Eastern Europe also has a “Western orientation” or “Western link-
age” which must be taken into account and which the Soviet Union
lacks. These historical and cultural ties vary in strength. The Western
orientation of East European countries, arranged in a descending rank
order is: East Germany; Poland; Czechoslovakia; Hungary; Romania;
and Bulgaria. This Western orientation acts to increase Western influ-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
ence in East European countries and to limit policy options developed
by the West. Western orientation, rather than consumerism, could turn
out to be the most important long-term factor in US-Soviet relations
where the East Europeans are concerned.
Events in Eastern Europe have some impact on Soviet foreign and
domestic policy. For example, experiments in Poland and Hungary will
influence the Soviets. Criticisms of the Soviets by the West European
Communist parties have had resonance in Eastern Europe. We should
be conscious of this indirect effect and should take it into account in
our policy.
The comment was made that if one reviews the trends from Eastern
Europe for the last five to ten years from a Soviet perspective, they all
seem bad. And the Soviets are not facing up to the problem, by one
interpretation. By another, the squeaky wheel is getting the grease. It
was suggested that it might be useful to try to identify those things
that are likely to get immediate Soviet attention; i.e., to identify the
ceiling above which Soviets won’t tolerate interference. There was gen-
eral agreement that the action or reaction (i.e. use of force) line was
getting fuzzier, but none doubted that the Soviets would act when they
deemed it necessary.
The fuzziness, or blurring of Soviet perceptions of what actions
would be tolerated, was viewed as good. The Soviets are still going to
be vigilant in areas where they feel the US is pushing greater autonomy
for Eastern Europe. All agreed that US policies had to include initiatives
that would fall within the fuzzy area and succeed by not ruffling
Soviet feathers.
There was disagreement about the types of initiatives that would
meet this criterion. Some felt that the Soviets would not allow any
move by the Eastern European countries that would slacken the Soviet
control of their economies or planning processes, and that any help
given to Eastern European economies would eventually filter back to
the Soviet Union and work to the US’s detriment. Another body of
opinion held that the Soviets would welcome the movement of some
of their East European problem children (in the economic sense) into an
international framework that would impose some economic discipline
without excessively increasing the autonomy of Eastern Europe. IMF
membership for Poland was given as an example, but doubt was
expressed that either Warsaw or Moscow could permit genuine IMF
discipline to interfere with Polish central planning and CMEA regional
trade schemes.
A similar disagreement concerned the linkage between technology
transfer, economic growth, and military capability. Some argued that
there was a direct linkage, i.e., that more technology transfer led to
more economic growth and inevitably to greater military capabilities;

Eastern Europe Region
others that military investment decisions depended more on the inter-
national context than on the availability of new technology from the
West.
A final area of discussion was how to handle the inevitable confron-
tations between the US and the SU in Eastern Europe. There was general
agreement that we should be more ambiguous about our exact course
of action than we have been in the past (specifically at the time of
Czechoslovakia), and that we should allude to the political costs of
possible Soviet actions. Using Radio Free Europe more advantageously
in such endeavors was mentioned. The possibility of increasing ethnic
interactions (i.e., playing on the Western orientation) and using any
influence gained therefrom was also suggested.
Several items not directly related to the day’s topic of discussion
were mentioned:
1. Most thought it very useful to have a short period of general
conversation before focussing on the agenda item. It was tentatively
agreed to use the time while lunch was being eaten for this purpose.
2. Topics suggested for future meetings included: U.S. relations
with the GDR, including the impact of U.S. intra-agency organizational
structure on policy development; the Exim Bank, and particularly opin-
ions on the Stevenson initiatives;3 ethnicity and national minorities in
the USSR and Eastern Europe; and the relationship of technology trans-
fer to economic growth and military power in East-West relations.
3 Senator Adlai Stevenson III (D-Illinois) scheduled a number of hearings in the
Senate in support of an expansion of the role of the Export-Import Bank.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
23.
Memorandum for the Special Coordination Committee1
Washington, May 14, 1978
SUBJECT
Annual Review of Ongoing Covert Action Activities as Required by Executive
Order 120362
[Omitted here is information unrelated to Eastern Europe.]
SOVIET AND EAST EUROPEAN BOOK DISTRIBUTION
1. STATUS:
The ongoing program for distributing uncensored literature to the
Soviet Union and East Europe was last reviewed by the SCC in February
SCC review, CIA was directed to submit proposals for expanding the
program, which resulted in an augmented budget for FY 78 of [dollar
amount not declassified]. These funds provide for the publishing and
distribution of books and periodicals, support to emigre organizations
for the same purpose, and human rights publicity. An important accom-
plishment of the modest latter program was continued publication of
a newsletter to help coordinate activities of human rights groups in
Western Europe. Distribution statistics from the major book distribu-
show an increase of 40% over the same period of last year. Projected
over a 12 month period we estimate a total distribution of 245,000
books by this one activity, as opposed to 175,000 in the previous year.
Financial assistance is being given to a major Russian emigre publishing
house, and one time assistance was given to a Russian-language period-
ical to help it organize its financial status and find outside backing;
this was successful. A publishing asset will put out 10 books in Russian
initiatives, including the economic stimulus provided to the Russian
publishing market by the increased purchases of our book distribution
project, we expect a significant increase in the publication of important
books by the end of FY 78. Feedback from individuals in the East,
I–020, Minutes SCC Intelligence 1978. Secret; Sensitive. There is no evidence that the
program was specifically discussed in the SCC. The Summary of Conclusions of the
May 16 meeting, approved by Aaron on May 22, make no mention of the Publication
and Distribution program. (Ibid.)
2 Executive Order 12036 assigned responsibility for special activities or covert action
to the CIA and required an annual review by the SCC of ongoing special activities.
(Section 1–306 (a))

Eastern Europe Region
travelers and recent emigres confirms the program is having a
strong impact.
2. PLANS:
The virtually insatiable demand in the Soviet Union and East
Europe for proscribed literature, inflation and the decline of the dollar’s
purchasing power constitute major challenges for the program. The
FY 79 budget of [dollar amount not declassified] does not mitigate these
pressures, hence it is proposed to augment the FY 79 allocation by [2
lines not declassified] through reprogramming of funds within CIA. For
FY 80, the program is budgeted at [dollar amount not declassified]. This
figure includes [dollar amount not declassified] for book distribution;
[dollar amount not declassifed] for book publishing, [dollar amount not
declassifed] for periodicals; [dollar amount not declassified] each to Ukrain-
ian and Russian emigre organizations for publishing and distribution;
[dollar amount not declassified] for human rights publicity; and [dollar
amount not declassified] for developmental activities.
[Omitted here is information unrelated to Eastern Europe.]
24.
Excerpt From the President’s Daily Brief
Washington, August 31, 1978
[Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Mate-
For the President Only. 2 pages not declassified.]

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
25.
Memorandum From Robert King of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, September 1, 1978
SUBJECT
Your Request for a Memorandum Detailing Policy in Eastern Europe
Reg2 passed on your request to him and Bill Quandt for a memo
on policy in the two areas. Reg asked that I handle Eastern Europe
separately.
1. Stages of U.S. Policy Toward Eastern Europe. Since January 1977
there have been three stages in U.S. policy. Initially there was a period
of caution as the new administration began a general policy review.
From January until the beginning of September, no new initiatives with
any of the East European countries were undertaken, although previous
European relationships were maintained.
A more active and decisive stage became evident toward the end
of the summer of 1977. The PRM–9 review of European issues included
a section on Eastern Europe, and the final PRC meeting on that aspect
of European policy was held at the end of August. The President signed
PD–21 on September 133 which set the administration’s policies—we
would seek to work with East European governments to enhance their
international independence and increase the degree of internal liberali-
zation. In concrete terms this policy involved continuing to give prefer-
ential treatment to Poland and Romania, improving relations with
Hungary through returning the Crown and negotiating a trade agree-
mentunder appropriate conditions,but relations with Bulgaria, Czecho-
slovakia, and the GDR would remain limited until there is some
progress in either independence or liberalization although steps might
be taken to put relations with these three countries on a more nor-
mal basis.
Since the enunciation of that policy one year ago, our efforts have
been focused on carrying it out. The highlights have included the
President’s visit to Poland, the granting of $500 million in CCC credits
to Poland for the purchase of U.S. grain, returning the Crown of St.
21. Secret; Eyes Only. Sent for information. Larrabee initialed the memorandum for King.
2 Reginald Bartholomew.
3 See Document 16.

Eastern Europe Region
Stephen to Hungary, negotiation of a U.S.-Hungarian Trade Agree-
ment, including MFN, and welcoming Ceausescu here for a State visit.
With the Ceausescu visit and ratification of the Hungarian Trade
Agreement the specific policy initiatives in PD–21 have been completed
and we now seem to be entering a period marked by a less active
policy for Eastern Europe. State Department East Europeanists are
pushing to negotiate a Claims/Gold agreement with Czechoslovakia
and may want to consider discussions on MFN with Bulgaria. There
is some interest in maintaining the momentum that we have built
up to deal with other outstanding issues toward the East European
countries. The difficulty, however, is that those countries with whom
we could achieve progress in our bilateral relations—Czechoslovakia,
Bulgaria, and the GDR—have not exhibited the international independ-
ence or the internal liberalization that would justify such actions.
With Poland, Romania, and Hungary we have now about reached
the limit of what we can or would want to do. We should continue to
work with Poland on the debt problem, but beyond granting the Poles
an additional large CCC credit this year (and in future years) there is
little more that we can do. We are similarly limited with Romania and
Hungary. High level visits represent the most we can do in continuing
to emphasize our interest in the region. A Gierek visit possibly in
1979 was mentioned during the President’s Warsaw stop, and the
Romanians are anxious to host the President in Bucharest. The Hungari-
ans would like to see Kadar in Washington, but such a visit would
create problems with Hungarian-Americans who are still smarting
from the return of the Crown. An invitation for a Kadar visit would
best be issued after 1980, with an official visit by Secretary Vance to
Budapest and possibly one by the Vice President as interim measures.
2. Your Role in Policy Formulation. You have clearly played the
dominant role in formulating our policy towards Eastern Europe. Your
background, expertise, and interest have given you a much stronger
and more authoritative voice in this area. Furthermore, Eastern Europe
is not a major focus of policy concern, thus other policy players are
not willing to spend their political capital to challenge you in that area.
You have been largely responsible for conceptually framing the
approach to Eastern Europe, but you have also been active in initiating
and implementing specific actions (return of the Crown and Polish
CCC credits). Your role as the strongest advocate for increasing from
$300 to $500 million the total amount of CCC credit for Poland last
December, however, resulted in a certain degree of criticism. Because
of your Polish background, there was some muted feeling that you
were playing favorites. In the context of the President’s visit and the
importance of Poland, this was unjust. It would be useful in the future,
however, to appear less of an advocate on controversial matters which

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
involve Poland. The European Bureau of State and the Department of
Commerce can take the lead, and they will lead boldly if they have
your support. If it becomes necessary to reschedule the Polish debt
there will be strong opposition from Treasury and EB at State to a
policy giving Poland benefits other debtor countries do not enjoy. This
issue is one on which you should avoid taking the lead if possible.
3. Reflections on the Decision-Making Process: My comments on the
decision-making process are probably not unique to Eastern Europe,
although as an area of lower priority the problems with the process
may be more evident than in the areas of higher risks and concerns.
—Interagency papers that have formed the basis for decisions,
generally drafted in segments by several different agencies, have
tended to be too long and poorly integrated. They may be useful in
helping the working-level elements of various agencies to understand
the problems, but they do not seem to be helpful at higher levels in
informing and channeling discussion.
—The policy options tend to be less sharply defined than might
be desirable. The working level tend to round off the edges and fuzz
the sharpness of options in the search for consensus.
—While the policy process is never orderly and subject to neat
timetables, there tends to be too little time before decision meetings to
digest papers and even agenda, with the result that principals are less
well prepared than would be desirable.
The drafting of policy and options papers by a single agency with
ample opportunity for other agencies to comment and register dissents
would seem to be more useful and orderly mechanism.
4. Basic Documents. Appended to this paper is a copy of PD–21,
the principal statement of general policy toward Eastern Europe.4
4 Not attached.

Eastern Europe Region
26.
Paper Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1
Washington, September 1978
Dissidence in Eastern Europe
Key Points
• The new wave of dissidence in Eastern Europe last year, although
now considerably diminished, shows no signs of vanishing. It has
been most intense in Poland and Czechoslovakia, somewhat less so in
Romania and East Germany. (U)
• The dissidents, few in number, are generally outspoken, noncon-
formist intellectuals. They have developed and sustained their causes
and have attracted some popular support, particularly in Poland, where
those who protest are relatively well organized and well led. (U)
• The East European regimes, however, have kept the domestic
impact of dissident activity within bounds. They have made it clear
that a price must be paid for active dissidence—loss of job, harassment,
physical abuse, police detention, or a jail sentence. There is no evidence
that the dissidents’ causes have been taken up by influential party or
government officials. (C)
• The formulation of regime policy toward dissent could, however,
become a serious source of discord within local leaderships, particularly
as a new generation of leaders displaces the old. The toleration of any
measure of dissent will remain a risky course, both for the national
leaders and for their relations with the USSR. (U)
[Omitted here is the Table of Contents.]
Dissidence in Eastern Europe
The Roots of Dissidence
The authoritarian systems in Eastern Europe invite dissent by con-
tinuing to place a wide range of human endeavor within a political
The paper was prepared in the Eastern European Division, Office of Regional and Political
Analysis. Paragraph classification and handling restriction marks are handwritten. The
paper included country studies for Poland, Czechoslovakia, East Germany, and Romania.
A note on the paper indicates: “Hungary and Bulgaria are omitted, since neither has
exhibited significant dissent. Hungary remains virtually untouched by dissidence” while
dissidence in Bulgaria “came to light only in March 1978 with the appearance of a
‘Declaration 1978’ which claimed to speak for dissent group, ABD. Whether such a group
exists or what ABD means is not known.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
straitjacket, by refusing to tolerate criticism, and by insisting that what-
ever change takes place be initiated by an inherently conservative,
bureaucratic structure. Above all, the formal repudiation of the most
onerous Stalinist controls has made possible the systematic expression
of dissent. (U)
The roots of dissident activity reach back into the mid-1950s and
the search for new political, social, and economic blueprints initiated
by Khrushchev’s denunciation of Stalinism. Many of today’s dissidents
either participated in, or are spiritual heirs of, those efforts to revise
ideology and the Stalinist system that was built in its name. The present-
day dissidents, unlike the earlier “revisionists,” do not consider ideo-
logical reform as the key to systemic reform, but they do seek, as did
their predecessors, to expand the range of individual freedoms allowed
by the authorities. (U)
In the early days of de-Stalinization, dissent against various aspects
of the Stalinist system was generally tolerated and even officially
encouraged. Candid discussion and innovative proposals were permit-
ted both for their cathartic value and as proof that Stalinism had been
rejected. Over time, some of this activity became officially unacceptable.
“Dissidence” that went beyond the bounds set by local Stalinist leaders
still clinging to power or that led to “radical” demands for freedoms
was banned. (U)
In some instances, the advocates of reform became involved, will-
ingly or accidentally, in scheming against local Stalinist leaders by
political moderates, which was made possible by the concurrent politi-
cal struggles in the Soviet Union. In Poland, for example, revisionist
Marxists like Leszek Kolakowski publicly battled against dogmatism
and helped bring to power in 1956 a “reformist” party leader, Wlady-
slaw Gomulka. Similarly, the fight by Hungarian writers to end censor-
ship in late 1955 was closely linked with the efforts by backers of
reformer Imre Nagy to bring down Stalinist party leader Matyas
The spontaneous ferment of de-Stalinization was also at work in
East Germany and Czechoslovakia in the mid-1950s, albeit more sub-
dued. In East Germany, a young Marxist philosopher, Wolfgang Har-
ich, led a small group of party members in advocating economic and
political reforms, “true independence” (that is, an escape from Soviet
hegemony) for East Germany, and eventual reunification of the two
German states. Unlike developments in Poland and Hungary, however,
the actions of the East German dissidents were of little consequence.
Harich made his move too late (after the suppression of the Hungarian
uprising when there was a general turn to orthodoxy) and did not
make common cause with party chief Ulbricht’s opponents in the
Politburo. (U)

Eastern Europe Region
Efforts after 1956 to suppress revisionism, and to tighten the allow-
able bounds of de-Stalinization, gave rise to the first readily identifiable
dissidents, since many of the “revisionists” refused to abide by the
new restrictions. In Poland, where revisionism had run the deepest
and where many revisionists were for a time allowed to air their views
in official publications, Gomulka—initially considered a reformer—
gradually followed a more conservative course. By 1963 Gomulka’s
retrenchment in the cultural and ideological spheres prompted writers
and other intellectuals to react with what have become classic dissident
In early 1964 well-known Polish intellectuals published the “Letter
of 34,” in which they protested censorship and other controls on book
publication. Jacek Kuron and Karol Modzelewski, two young Marxist
scholars who had studied under Kolakowski, subsequently circulated
a 90-page open letter criticizing Gomulka personally and calling for
the creation of a “true socialist state.” In May 1965 the Warsaw branch
of the Writers’ Association demanded that censorship be abolished.
In October 1966 Kolakowski commemorated the 10th anniversary of
Gomulka’s rise to power with a public condemnation of “repressions
and lack of democracy in Poland.” In reprisal he was expelled from
the party. Other writers who protested Kolakowksi’s expulsion were, in
turn, also expelled. Gomulka’s increasing problems with the dissident
intellectuals came to a head in early 1968, when a ban on staging a classic
Polish drama with anti-Russian overtones led to a writers’ “revolt”
and to student riots. Amidst an ensuing party factional crisis, Kola-
kowksi and others were forced to emigrate, and many student leaders,
including Kuron and a newcomer to dissident activity, Adam Michnik,
were jailed. (U)
While Gomulka was tightening up in Poland, Czechoslovakia’s
Stalinist leader Novotny, under the pressure of Khrushchev’s second
round of de-Stalinization and the weight of a stagnating Czechoslovak
economy, belatedly undertook the de-Stalinization that he had avoided
in the mid-1950s. As in that earlier period, the general feeling that
dogmatism was being rejected, albeit in a hesitant way, encouraged
spontaneous talk of revisionist policy alternatives to prevailing neo-
Stalinism. Much of the pressure on Novotny to go further than he
wanted came from Slovak intellectuals and journalists, whose public
criticisms and calls for reform came to be viewed as “dissidence.” More
important, these dissident acts were probably encouraged by Slovak
party leaders who wanted to force Novotny to redeem a Slovak nation-
alism that had been labeled bourgeois during the Stalinist purges. (U)
Novotny, beginning in 1963, presided over a relatively widespread
de-Stalinization that countenanced substantial revisionist discussion,
startling freedoms in the arts, and permitted, at least for a time, consid-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
erable frankness in the media. It was during this period that such
revisionist theoreticians as Zdenek Mlynar developed theories of how
to build a “democratized” Communism, ideas that were to be put in
practice in 1968. The period also had its outright dissidents who fell
victim to Novotny’s periodic efforts to retrench or at least to set limits
to de-Stalinization. (U)
In 1966 Novotny began to take a tougher stance toward noncon-
formist intellectuals, especially the writers. In so doing, he was
following the lead of the Soviets, who in February of that year had
tried and convicted the nonconformist writers Sinyavskiy and Daniel.
These trials sent shock waves through the Soviet and East European
intellectual community and marked the beginning of sustained dissi-
dence in the Soviet Union. (U)
The East German regime also responded to the pressure of Khrush-
chev’s second de-Stalinization with moderation of its cultural policies,
but with greater hesitation, abrupt policy shifts and considerably less
domestic effect than in Czechoslovakia. For example, the nonconformist
East German songster Wolf Biermann, who was criticized and stripped
of party membership in early 1963, was allowed to publish his poems
and perform his songs in 1964 and, in late 1965, was abruptly banned
from performing and was labeled an anti-Communist. Another victim
of this regime ambivalence was Robert Havemann, an eminent scientist
who was prohibited from teaching in 1964 and then retired in 1965
because of his outspoken views. (U)
Many revisionist ideas were put into effect in Czechoslovakia dur-
ing the “Prague Spring” of 1968. Perhaps surprisingly, this institutional-
ization of reform ideas did not lead to greater dissident pressures for
similar changes elsewhere in Eastern Europe. The Soviet-led Warsaw
Pact quashing of the Czechoslovak “experiment” in August was pro-
tested by dissidents in other East European countries, but it also stifled
hope that popular agitation for a “humane” type of Communism would
bear fruit. That hope has been rekindled by the convergence of circum-
stances during the past two years. (U)
New Stimuli to Dissident Activity
The 1975 Helsinki accord and efforts of the East European regimes
to show a measure of compliance with its human rights provisions
raised some popular expectation that authoritarian controls might be
loosened, and stimulated dissident efforts to that end. There was a
widespread anticipation among East Germans in the summer of 1976,
for instance, that because the accord signified “international recogni-
tion” of East Germany, the regime could not, or would no longer,
block foreign travel on the grounds that travel was predicated on such
“recognition.” (U)

Eastern Europe Region
Even more important, the decision to review implementation of
the Helsinki agreement in Belgrade in 1977 prompted some dissidents
to conclude that a Communist desire to show a good record in Belgrade
might make regimes susceptible to pressures for internal reforms. Other
dissidents were well aware that Moscow intended Helsinki to signify
only Western recognition of Soviet hegemony in Eastern Europe. As
a result, they apparently emphasized the human rights commitments
of the accord as a way of inducing the West to reconsider its support
for the agreement or at least to force the Soviets and their allies to
observe human rights as a price of Western recognition of Soviet he-
gemony over the area. (U)
The calculation that pressure might lead to some changes for the
better was fortified by what many dissidents saw as important Soviet
concessions regarding national independence made to the “Eurocom-
munists” at the Berlin conference of European Communist parties in
June 1976. For example, the East German dissident philosopher Robert
Havemann, who considers himself a Eurocommunist of the Spanish
variety, seized upon the conference as a vindication of his longtime
advocacy of a Communist system that included domestic pluralism
and a “true” sovereignty in foreign affairs. Some Polish dissidents also
concluded that the time was ripe for the East Europeans to strive for
greater autonomy from Moscow. Indeed, public, that is to say, dissident
pressure was seen as an effective way to lead the regime toward seeking
“true sovereignty.” (U)
The vigorous US human rights policy enunciated in early 1977
gave some impetus to dissident activity and emboldened persons to
speak out who otherwise might have remained silent. Many dissidents
probably welcomed the US position because they believed it would
help expose the vulnerabilities of the East European regimes with
regard to human rights. Those who were already actively pressing a
cause and considered international attention important for both its
success and their own protection no doubt calculated that the US
human rights policy would serve these ends.2 (U)
East European dissidents were also encouraged by publicity and
support from West European media, politicians and government lead-
ers, public organizations, influential intellectuals, and maverick Com-
2 This was not the unanimous view, however. Other dissidents apparently were
wary of the American policy and, recalling what they consider past US inconsistency
toward Eastern Europe, were skeptical that Washington would press its objective with
consistency or determination. Those who consider themselves Communist reformers
rejected the helping hand of a “capitalist” state for ideological reasons; others felt vulner-
able to charges of being “agents of imperialism.” [Footnote is in the original.]

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
munist parties.3 This support has generally been a consequence of the
US initiative, of a naturally keen interest in developments close to
home, and of domestic and regional political pressures. Some, particu-
larly East European, emigres may have seen in the US-led, Western
human rights campaign evidence of a new, more confrontational policy
toward Eastern Europe, which they welcomed. (U)
Against this international backdrop, region-wide trends and devel-
opments in individual countries gave a direct stimulus to dissidence.
By mid-1976 many dissidents were undoubtedly aware that all of the
Warsaw Pact countries faced difficult economic problems, and probably
calculated that the regimes were thus more vulnerable to pressures for
concessions. (U)
The economic factor was most important in Poland, where the
workers’ riots in June 1976 dramatized popular dissatisfaction and
revealed the regime’s political weaknesses. Polish dissidents had
already become more active by late-1975, when they were successful
in modifying government-proposed changes in the constitution. In
September 1976 they seized upon the issue of the release of imprisoned
rioters to show the need for political reform.4 This attracted popular
support and, in turn, helped stimulate other dissident activity in Poland
and, perhaps, elsewhere in Eastern Europe. (U)
In Czechoslovakia, the well-publicized Charter 77 manifesto was
triggered by the publication in the Czechoslovak press in the fall of
1976 of the UN human rights covenants. Czechoslovak dissent, in
general, has been fed by the despair of those reformers who had been
purged and ostracized since 1968. Many of these persons may have
gained new hope that the stagnating economy would impel the leader-
ship to rehabilitate, among others, purged economic and managerial
functionaries. In East Germany, Rudolf Bahro’s wide-ranging critique
in August 1977 of the “system’s” deficiencies examined at length the
country’s economic shortcomings. (U)
Who Are the Dissidents?
The dissident activists in Eastern Europe have traditionally come
from the educated, articulate stratum of society, a broadly defined
3 For some dissidents, support by Eurocommunists has not been consistent enough.
Thus, a prominent Czechoslovak dissident publicly acknowledged Eurocommunist sup-
port, but said that it “could be more effective and courageous.” He called on the West
European Communist parties to publish political material by exiled East Europeans and
to establish direct contacts with dissidents in the East. [Footnote is in the original.]
4 Polish leader Gierek’s talk, in the immediate wake of the riots, about the need
for “democratization” probably helped some dissidents to believe that chances for reform
were good. As time passed, however, the regime talked less about the need for political
changes. [Footnote is in the original.]

Eastern Europe Region
intelligentsia. They are politically dedicated, idealistic men and women
of all ages whose zeal and commitment make them willing to pay the
substantial personal price that the regimes exact for openly noncon-
formist behavior. (U)
The broad spectrum is evident in the Polish dissident ranks, which
includes academicians, lawyers, writers, journalists, retired non-Com-
munist politicians and soldiers, Catholic priests, and university stu-
dents. In East Germany, the voices of dissent have been scientists-
turned-political philosophers, popular entertainers, writers, and frus-
trated emigrants. Czechoslovak dissidents, largely those persons who
helped generate or implement the reform ideas of 1968, include philoso-
phers, writers, dramatists, entertainers, and politicians. In Romania,
aside from a few writers and scholars and a group of Baptist clergy,
the majority of dissidents have been would-be emigrants or, more
recently, members of discontented national minorities. (U)
While the dissidents have had some success in expanding their
numbers, they have generally failed to enlarge their circle5 of political
activists beyond a small portion of the intelligentsia and have been
unsuccessful in politicizing other segments of the population. [classifica-
tion not declassified]
The most success at attracting a broader following has been evident
in Poland. One dissident group initially championed a cause—help for
and the release of jailed workers—that garnered considerable popular
support. This and another dissident organization have enlisted students
into dissident work and may have won popular good will through
efforts to counsel people about their everyday problems. The second
group also claims to have financial backing and considerable moral
support from private farmers (an important class in Poland where
three-quarters of the farms are in private hands) and retired, probably
World War II, military veterans.6 Some of the changes that Polish
dissidents advocate are looked on favorably, if passively, by liberal
members of the Communist Party establishment. Despite considerable
effort, however, the Polish dissidents have not enlisted much worker
support. The influential Catholic Church, moreover, has not backed
them, even though some Catholic priests, seeking to win greater reli-
gious freedom, are also dissidents. [classification not declassified]
Despite the rapid increase in the number of Czechoslovak dissi-
dents, they continue to be mostly drawn from the intelligentsia. In
Romania, Goma’s “following,” swelled from seven to 300 in less than
5 An unknown hand underlined “failed to enlarge their circle” in this sentence.
6 An unknown hand underlined “financial backing and considerable moral support
from private farmers,” “and retired,” and “military veterans” in this sentence and wrote
“STATE MEMCON” in the left-hand margin next to it.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
six months. This was largely illusory, however, because most persons
subscribed purely as a device to get out of the country. (U)
There are a number of reasons why dissidents fail to attract mean-
ingful support. The vast majority of East Europeans obviously consid-
ers the personal cost of participation far too high and believes there is
only a slim chance that dissident activity can produce change. Political
apathy and anti-intellectualism among workers and a frequent aloof-
ness among intellectuals are the major factors that have kept these
two key segments of society apart. The regimes naturally exploit and
encourage these attitudes. Liberals within the establishment intelligen-
tsia may sympathize with certain dissident objectives but, more than
likely, they consider many of the goals and methods unrealistic, if
not dangerous. Those dissidents who have long been open critics are
sometimes viewed, justifiably or not, as gadflies, whose failure to pro-
duce change is proof of their futility. (U)
Frequent personal and philosophical differences among dissidents
have weakened their overall cause. This diversity and disunity helps
in part to explain why some in the regimes are relatively tolerant of
dissidents; a fragmented movement cannot draw wide support. (U)
What Do They Want?
The dissidents seek a variety of changes in the existing systems of
rule in Eastern Europe. Some advocate sweeping reforms that would
in fact constitute revolutionary changes in the way the Communist
systems function. While none of the dissidents challenge outright the
leading role of the party, as this would make them vulnerable to charges
of treason, some of the dissidents, notably those associated with one
of the leading Polish groups, incline strongly toward West European
Christian democratic views. Those pressing for the broadest changes
include most Polish dissidents, some East Germans, and many Czecho-
slovak Chartists. Their political platforms typically embrace the
following demands: (U)
• A “real” multiparty system or some formal mechanism for
greater interest group representation within a one-party system (usu-
ally,
but not always explicitly,
within a
so-called Communist
framework).
• The abolition or significant relaxation of censorship.
• The reduction of centralized, bureaucratic controls, especially in
the economic and government administrative spheres.
• Greater independence from the USSR. Nonetheless, most dissi-
dents recognize, however reluctantly, the imposed necessity of some
type of close relationship with the Soviet Union.
• Respect for human and civil rights already delineated in domes-
tic laws and international accords signed by East European govern-

Eastern Europe Region
Aside from the “programmatic” dissidents, there are those who
seek more modest changes. Thus, the Romanian Goma speaks out for
a de-Stalinization patterned after what he calls the “livable life” in
Hungary and Poland. Many of the Czechoslovak dissidents want reha-
bilitation—not necessarily of their political views, but of themselves
and their families—and the opportunity to live a more normal life.
Then there are the more narrowly focused “one issue” dissidents such
as the East German writers, who want more freedom to write what
they wish, and the Romanian Baptists, who want more freedom to
preach. Finally, there have been some, such as many signatories of
Romanian writer Goma’s manifesto, who have taken to dissent as a
device to facilitate emigration. (U)
Several prominent dissidents—the East Germans Havemann and
Biermann, the Hungarian Agnes Heller, and the Czechoslovak Zdenek
Mlynar—consider themselves ideological brethren of the Eurocommu-
nists. Others—such as the Poles Kolakowski and Michnik—are skepti-
cal that Eurocommunism will turn out to be different from the Commu-
nism practiced in the Warsaw Pact states. Nonetheless, all have
welcomed the Eurocommunists’ support in the struggle for more inde-
pendence from the Soviets. (U)
The dissidents frequently differ on ways to bring about change.
The East German Bahro, for example, appeals to “men of conscience”
within the establishment to work for change. Some Polish dissidents
believe popular pressure on the leadership can induce it to initiate
reforms. Other Poles do not believe the system can reform itself and
have tried to establish a de facto pluralism by founding, without regime
approval, publications, groups, and societies that speak to and on behalf
of specific interest groups. The Polish dissidents so far claim to be
satisfied with these small steps which they feel will slowly erode regime
control. They have shunned violence, realizing that this would give
the regime cause for repression and would dissipate the limited public
support they now enjoy. (U)
Some dissidents have formed secret organizations to avoid regime
reprisals. A secret Polish group,7 [6 lines not declassified]. In East Ger-
many, the anonymous manifestos that appeared early this year claimed
to represent the views of amorphous groups but, more than likely,
were the work of a very few individuals. [classification and handling
restriction not declassified]
Such secret groups can presumably exist for a long time because
their members pay little or no personal cost for belonging. They could
7 An unknown hand wrote “STATE MEMCON” in the left-hand margin next to
the first two sentences in this paragraph.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
also play an important role during a period of political transition, when
uncertainty and change are in the air. Generally, however, anonymous
dissent has little impact, if only because there is a tendency among the
population to view it as a possible police provocation. (U)
There has thus far been little active cooperation and almost no
advance coordination among dissidents in different East European
countries. The few known instances of such contacts across national
boundaries have usually been instigated by Polish dissidents. [less than
1 line not declassified] group has periodic contacts with dissidents in the
USSR.8 The most brazen and ambitious effort at cooperation occurred in
August 1978, when Polish and Czechoslovak dissidents met in southern
Poland to discuss possible joint actions and then issued a communique.9
[classification not declassified]
Nonetheless, many dissidents see disadvantages in such personal
contact. It is difficult to arrange, and may expose dissidents to serious
legal charges, such as conspiracy. Any attempt at coordinated actions
across national boundaries would arouse deep suspicion in Moscow
and induce Soviet pressure on the East Europeans to crack down.
Existing evidence that dissidents respond to or imitate the activities of
dissidents elsewhere in the region most often indicates only that they
are well informed of each others’ activities by Western media broad-
Impact of Dissent
The dissidents have not altered in any fundamental way the East
European regimes’ style of rule, nor have they induced the governments
to adopt more conciliatory domestic policies. If anything, there has
been a shift—slight in Poland, pronounced in Czechoslovakia—toward
tougher internal controls. Indeed, the dissidents seem to have brought
upon themselves varying degrees of harassment and repression. Nor
has dissidence helped generate serious political discord within the
party leadership that could provide the vehicle for political change.10
[classification not declassified]
Nonetheless, the mere existence of dissidence has been an embar-
rassment to regimes that insist on making a show of unanimous popular
support and try to conceal the repressive features of their system. At
8 An unknown hand highlighted this sentence in the left-hand margin.
9 The Poles apparently consider this as the first in a series of cooperative efforts.
They have also been trying to encourage Hungarian dissident intellectuals to become
outspoken and to use samizdat publications to express their views. [Footnote is in the
original.]
10 An unknown hand underlined this sentence and wrote “1” in the left-hand margin
next to it. The “1” corresponds to a handwritten note at the bottom of the page that
reads “ANALYSIS.”

Eastern Europe Region
least initially, dissent confronted the regimes with a challenge that had
to be assessed and kept within bounds.11 It has probably caused some
differences within leaderships over tactics12 to be used in muzzling
dissent, although these differences have not been obvious or persistent.
The more organized dissidents—those in Poland and Czechoslovakia—
probably created some strains, albeit limited, between the regime and
segments of the populace by strengthening endemic popular antipathy
toward such institutions as the police, bureaucracy, and the censor.
The dissidents frequent use of legalistic tactics in challenging regime
practices has made the authorities, in turn, more attentive to legal
procedures in dealing with the dissidents. [classification not declassified]
The dissidents’ protests against repressive and restrictive regime
policies—including tough police countermeasures that substantiated
the initial allegations—provided an issue that, within the context of
the Helsinki review process and the US emphasis on human rights
issues, placed the East European regimes on the defensive in foreign
affairs. How best to throttle dissent reportedly caused some differences
for a time between the Soviets and East Europeans.13 The Soviets have
clearly been inclined toward a more heavy-handed approach than most
of their East European allies.14 [classification and handling restriction not
declassified]
Some of the East European regimes clearly saw dissent as a poten-
tially troublesome obstacle to their desire to maintain or expand eco-
nomic and, in some cases, political relations with the United States.
Consequently, the regimes’ handling of dissident activity appears in
some limited ways to have taken the US human rights interest into
account. The Polish decision in February 1977 to grant amnesty to
workers jailed the previous summer in connection with disturbances
over proposed price increases was announced less than a week after
the United States expressed concern for Soviet and Czechoslovak dissi-
dents. The move was an unexpected capitulation to dissident demands,
and was probably intended to enhance Warsaw’s image in Washington
and reduce the possibility that the dissident question might intrude
on bilateral relations. To be sure, Poland has consistently handled its
dissidents more subtly than most other East European states, but the
regime’s moves probably reflected more its concern with domestic
11 An unknown hand underlined this phrase and wrote “2” in the left-hand margin
corresponding to “VARIOUS STATE CABLES” at the bottom of the page.
12 An unknown hand underlined this phrase.
13 An unknown hand underlined “reportedly caused some differences for a time
between the Soviets and East Europeans” in this sentence.
14 An unknown hand wrote “ANALYSIS” in the margin below this and the next
four paragraphs.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
political factors than a wish to please the United States. [classification
not declassified]
Similarly, the Hungarian regime’s decision not to punish 30 would-
be dissidents who in February 1977 supported the Czechoslovak Char-
tists may have been taken in the hope that this would deter the creation
of a dissident movement that could have an adverse impact on relations
with Washington. Budapest clearly hoped that the new US administra-
tion would be more inclined than its predecessors to return Hungarian
national treasures and grant Hungary most-favored-nation trading sta-
tus. The Hungarian decision to invite American religious leader Billy
Graham to Hungary in late 1976 was unquestionably intended to draw
attention to Budapest’s relatively moderate domestic policies at a time
of sharply increased dissident activity elsewhere in Eastern Europe.
[classification not declassified]
The Romanian regime was acutely concerned that US attention to
human rights could impede renewal of its most-favored-nation status.
More importantly, Bucharest was worried that this might set back its
“special relationship” with Washington that has been of major political
use in fending off the Soviets. As a consequence, the Romanians—
except for a brief crackdown in the spring of 1977, when they apparently
feared that there would be a dramatic increase in dissidence—have
encouraged dissidents to emigrate. The Ceausescu regime has not
shown, however, an inclination to adopt more enlightened domestic
policies, and remains perhaps the most repressive in Eastern Europe.
The regime has privately played down agitation for increased cultural
and linguistic rights by the Hungarian minority, calling it a Moscow-
inspired, Budapest-engineered tactic to tar Romania’s image. [classifica-
tion not declassified]
The Czechoslovak Government, despite its interest in settling sev-
eral longstanding bilateral issues with the United States, has not moder-
ated in any way its “hard-line” inclinations and has almost completely
ignored US sensitivities when dealing with its dissidents. [classification
not declassified]
Western publicity and support for dissidents has been largely
responsible for whatever successes and impact the dissenters have
made. Media coverage of their activities, when relayed back into East-
ern Europe, has provided important, if indirect lines of communication
between dissidents within a country and across national boundaries.
This coverage has bolstered morale and has often been the only way
for the dissidents’ cause to be publicized within their own country. As
a consequence, most dissidents have made a special effort to funnel
news to the West. Most frequently, their “connections” have been
friends and colleagues who have emigrated: Poles in London and Paris,
Romanians in Paris, East Germans in West Germany, and Czechoslo-
vaks in Rome and Vienna. [classification not declassified]

Eastern Europe Region
Outlook15
Although dissident activity in many East European countries has
declined considerably since early 1977, it is likely to persist throughout
the region. Many of the factors that propelled the recent surge of dissent
will still be at work. Economic problems may worsen and provide
dissidents with renewed hope that some of their proposals for political
reform will be heeded by regimes weakened by or preoccupied with
dissatisfied consumers. While such hopes may be misplaced, the combi-
nation of dissident pressures and a sluggish economy could create
acute domestic instability. [classification not declassified]
The situation is especially acute in Poland, where intense popular
dissatisfaction over consumer supplies is likely to continue over the
next several years, and where dissidents see their job of pressing for
political change as a long-term endeavor. In Czechoslovakia, recent
dissident activity has been tied to the 10th anniversary in August of
the Soviet-led invasion, but it will continue to exist at least as long as
the regime fails to come to terms with the large number of people who
were purged after 1968. The dilemma for the Prague regime—how to
rehabilitate people without rehabilitating their ideas—is complex, and
may be unsolvable without changes in the leadership. In Romania, the
direct link between dissidence and emigration that was established last
year should help perpetuate dissent in a country where a spartan
and harshly totalitarian life makes emigration particularly attractive.
[classification not declassified]
Other factors that could perpetuate and intensify East European
dissidence include:
• A difficult leadership succession problem in the USSR that engen-
ders either hope for moderate policies or fear of orthodoxy.
• Continued political sparring between the Soviets and the
Eurocommunists.
• The second Helsinki accords review conference to be held in
Madrid in 1980. This will remain a factor even though the dissidents’
expectations may have been reduced by the limited accomplishments
of the Belgrade review conference.
• The continued unsettling effect of Western contacts with, and
presence in, the region. The area’s economic needs argue against any
cutback in Western ties.
• Uncertainties surrounding the succession to Tito in Yugoslavia.
[classification not declassified]
On the personal level, the camaraderie of the struggle, the excite-
ment of matching wits with the authorities, and the hope that is
15 An unknown hand wrote “ANALYSIS” next to this section title.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
renewed by even a small success will also propel dissident actions.
[classification not declassified]
The authorities may calculate, perhaps with reason, that time is
on their side in the contest. The psychological and personal financial
price that dissidents have to pay is difficult for most to bear for a
sustained period. Their failure to get results not only adds to their
personal discouragement, but makes it difficult to maintain popular
interest. [classification not declassified]
At least in Poland, however, the dissidents can already claim to
have accomplished much, and are working to secure more. If they
continue to be allowed relative freedom, their activity could give rise
to the claim that a new norm of what is allowable has been wrested
from the regime. This, in turn, could encourage other dissidents in
Eastern Europe to emulate the Poles, a prospect that could be destabiliz-
ing for the area as a whole. A prolonged period of active Polish dissent
would increase the risk that chance and miscalculation could lead to
violence and possibly to a Soviet intervention. [classification not
declassified]
At present, East European dissidents can be seen most properly
as a small hard core of political “radicals” who do not have the popular
support or political leverage to force a change in any of the East Euro-
pean states or to effect a national uprising. Unlike many of the “revision-
ists” and dissidents of the past, they do not have access to the official
media, and are not operating in an environment of acute political
discord. The motive force for abrupt political change has most fre-
quently been political factionalism within the establishment (Nagy ver-
sus Rakosi; Gomulka versus Ochab; the Slovaks versus Novotny). Dissi-
dence, when it preceded such change, was an indicator of existing
political disarray and, frequently, a tool of factional maneuvering. If
history is any guide, dissidence will come to play an important role in
forcing political change only when it combines with economic problems
that acutely affect the consumer and at a time of political upheaval
within the ruling elite. [classification not declassified]
[Omitted here are the country-specific Table of Contents and coun-
try studies for Poland, Czechoslovakia, East Germany, and Romania.]

Eastern Europe Region
27.
Memorandum From Stephen Larrabee of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, October 25, 1978
SUBJECT
Priorities, Emerging Issues and Initiatives
EASTERN EUROPE
1. Basic Priorities
Relations with Romania, Poland and Hungary have visibly
improved. This improvement has underscored our desire to move
forward with countries that have either edged away from the Soviet
Union in foreign policy or have shown a significant degree of internal
liberalization. In contrast to past, East European countries have been
treated as countries in their own right, not just as appendages of the
Soviet Union.
2. Emerging Issues
—The major emerging issue is the question of CCC credits to
Poland; a PRC meeting to discuss this issue is to be held in next weeks.
—The question of the Czech Gold/Claims issue2 is also looming
on the horizon again; State has a number of task forces working on it
at present. The main problem remains getting Senator Long to sign on.
—There is a need to put relations with Romania back on an even
keel in the aftermath of the Pacepa affair; your meeting with Stefan
Andrei at the end of September was an important step in this direction.3
—We should also pay heed to maintaining the momentum in U.S.-
Hungarian relations begun with the return of the crown.
Beyond this, there are a number of more general issues which
should receive some systematic attention:
—how to deal with an increase of nationalism and dissent in East-
ern Europe, especially Poland, which may emerge in the aftermath of
Pope John Paul’s investiture and if there is a succession crisis in the
Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 59, Administration’s Policy: NSC: 1978. Secret. Sent
for information.
2 See Document 98.
3 In July, Major General Ion Mihai Pacepa, the Director of the Romanian Foreign
Intelligence Directorate, and a close adviser to Ceausescu, defected to the West while
in West Germany. He was granted asylum in the United States and was placed in
protective custody. See Document 208.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
Soviet Union. In general, East Europe is likely to be less quiescent than
it has been in the first 2 yrs of the Administration.
—growing instability in GDR.4 GDR has failed to stabilize to the
degree expected after signing of Basic Treaty in 1972. Unrest by intellec-
tuals is only part, if most visible, aspect of problem. Church-State
friction has escalated, and may continue to do [so] in aftermath of
Pope’s investiture, even though GDR is predominantly Protestant;
youth has become increasingly restless, and there has been increased
evidence of worker discontent as economic situation has deteriorated
over last few years. In short, despite orthodoxy of Honecker regime
and strong ties to Moscow, GDR remains a country to watch.
3. New Initiatives
—return Czech Gold
—visits to Hungary, Poland and Romania by high-level U.S. offi-
cial, possibly Vice President or Secretary of State, within context of trip
to other countries/region (such as Middle East).
—Gierek visit to U.S.
4 See Document 126.

Eastern Europe Region
28.
Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Turner
to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs
(Brzezinski)1
Washington, December 15, 1978
SUBJECT
Progress Report on Publishing and Distributing Literature to the Soviet Union
and Eastern Europe
REFERENCES
A. My Memorandum of 13 March 78; Subject: Support for Russian Emigre
Publishing House2
B. Your Memorandum of 18 March 78; Subject: Support for Russian and East
European Book Publishing3
not declassified] earmarked specifically for an increase in book publish-
ing and distribution to the USSR and Eastern Europe.
2. The [less than 1 line not declassified] funds were made available
to our major book distribution mechanism in February 1978. While all
the funds were obligated prior to 1 October 1978, the full impact on
actual distribution cannot be measured accurately until well into FY
79, as some of the books purchased are still in the distribution pipeline.
Since our operational mechanism was largely in place, it was possible
to utilize [less than 1 line not declassified] directly for the purchase and
distribution of books. Two preliminary indicators of the effectiveness
compared with a total of 175,000 for the same period the previous
than 1 line not declassified]
December 18. In his covering memorandum, Henze wrote: “The results are impressive.
They are typical of what can be done when long-established, professionally run programs
are given the opportunity to expand and the best judgment of the people who are
running them is taken as the basis of judgment for what can be done.” Regarding the
future plans for the program in the coming years, Henze concluded: “By about 1981 it
may be back at the level it was at 10–15 years ago. Its effectiveness is likely to be greater
than it was then since the material available to be used is better and the receptivity in
the target countries greater.”
3 Not found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
we provided the first subsidy [less than 1 line not declassified] to a
prominent Russian-language publishing house [less than 1 line not declas-
sified]. With these funds it was possible for them both to keep in business
and to plan the publication of approximately 12 titles of philosophical
works much in demand in the Soviet Union. [less than 1 line not
declassified]
4. Increased funding has allowed an increase in publication of
Russian-language books to provide a wider choice of materials avail-
able for infiltration into the Soviet Union. Two major works have now
appeared, and four additional titles are in the process of being pub-
lished. Three or four more titles will appear by the end of the year,
including the initial volume of what is to be a major historical series.
At the same time, in order to exploit more fully increased political
activism in Poland, eight additional titles are in various stages of publi-
cation in the Polish language. Five volumes have already appeared
and have been distributed. The demand for written materials in Poland
is high, [2 lines not declassified] which facilitates distribution. Russian
and Polish editions of works of current importance in Western thought
are now being given active consideration. [less than 1 line not declassified]
5. Although tighter controls exist in Czechoslovakia than in Poland
(especially during the tenth anniversary of the invasion) many manu-
scripts have been smuggled out of Czechoslovakia. The additional
funds were used to publish more of these materials in a Czech-language
journal and to publish an additional issue of this journal. Part of the
funds were also used in an effort to increase internal distribution. [less
than 1 line not declassified]
6. [6 lines not declassified] that our literature is distributed widely
in both East Europe and the USSR.
7. The preparation of this report was delayed because of the need
to collate information received through a number of outside contacts—
[1 line not declassified].
All portions of this document are SECRET.
Stansfield Turner

Eastern Europe Region
29.
Memorandum From Paul Henze of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, January 23, 1979
SUBJECT
CIA’s Soviet and East European Book and Publications Program (S)
[name not declassified] of CIA has just sent me (without going
through Turner) an extremely interesting report prepared by [name not
declassified] on the book distribution program targeted at the Soviet
Union (TAB B).2 It demonstrates that the Soviet program is maturing
and showing increase of effectiveness in depth. [name not declassified]
principal theme is the way in which responses from the Soviet Program
are beginning to exhibit the same patterns as the East European pro-
gram did at an earlier period in its development. The report provides
encouraging evidence of the sophistication and refinement of this pro-
gram and demonstrates that we have here an undertaking on which
we can build and expand almost indefinitely. I recommend you leaf
through the first few pages and note the passages I have underlined
In the light of this highly positive report, it is distressing, as
I mentioned to you in a recent Evening Report,3 to discover that
Turner has accepted OMB’s unimaginative dictum on this program—
ruling out any further expansion in 1980 or beyond. A program such
as this contributes as much to our national defense as any of our
weaponry—besides which its costs are chicken feed. The SCC endorsed
your recommendation for continued expansion in the summer of
2 Attached but not printed is a January 22 memorandum from [name not declassified]
to Henze to share with Brzezinski. The memorandum noted: “The program is moving
forward in a most positive way [text not declassified]. Thanks to your ability to keep the
funds flowing.” The report was not attached and not found. On October 18, 1978, two
days after Cardinal Woytyla was elected Pope, [name not declassified] had called Henze
to tell him that “among the recipients of [name not declassified] book mailings to Eastern
Europe had been Cardinal Woytyla.” Henze informed Brzezinski that [name not declassi-
fied] had been sending the Cardinal “considerable quantity of material in both Polish and
English, including Kultura and Kronika articles” and that [name not declassified] received
a postcard from the Cardinal thanking him for the mailings. (Carter Library, National
3 In a January 19 Evening Report to Brzezinski, Henze reported that Turner had
accepted [text not declassified] in the Soviet and East European book program for the
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
19774 and this recommendation has never been altered. To smoke out
Turner (who has probably not actually given this program any serious
thought) I recommend you send him the attached memorandum (TAB
A)5 asking for a status report. When that comes ([name not declassified]
will ensure that it makes the points we need made) we can take up
the issue of reprogramming funds to cover continued expansion. (S)
RECOMMENDATION
That you sign the attached memorandum to Turner (TAB A).6
4 See Document 17.
5 Attached but not printed is an undated draft memorandum from Brzezinski to
Turner requesting a report on the accomplishments to date of the Eastern Europe Book
Publishing and Distribution Program and a summary of plans for future implementation
of the effort.
6 Although a signed copy of the memorandum has not been found, a subsequent
memorandum indicated it was sent on January 26. See Document 32.
30.
Paper Prepared in the Department of State1
Washington, undated
EASTERN EUROPE, THE SOVIET UNION AND
FOREIGN POLICY AUTONOMY
I. Soviet/East European Political Framework
1. The Kremlin considers a stable, obedient East European buffer
zone, reasonably free of Western influence, to be essential to Soviet
security. This applies especially to the GDR.
2. While relatively quiescent in the aftermath of the 1968 Czechoslo-
vak invasion, East Germany and the regimes of East Europe remain
potentially unstable and politically unpopular. Moreover, the Soviets
are well aware of the ultimate contradiction between East European
spondence, 1979, M–Z. Confidential. Sent under a February 7 covering letter from
Anthony Lake to Ronaldo Sandenberg, Special Adviser to the Foreign Minister for
Political and Economic Affairs in the Bilateral Area in the Ministry of External Affairs
of Brazil.

Eastern Europe Region
nationalism and Russian control. Moscow therefore has shown limited
tolerance for either “destalinization” or “desatellization.”
3. In this situation, the Russians also are continuing to press for
tighter economic integration in Comecon and military integration in
the Warsaw Pact. Moreover, the Soviets seem intent, as a counter to
increased East-West contacts, on tightening up internal discipline in
Russia and in Eastern Europe.
4. Nonetheless, the actual exercise of control over the countries of
Eastern Europe has not proven to be easy for Moscow. Beyond the
broader forces of nationalism, East European instability has become
an increasing possibility. This is due to the expansion of East-West
relations, and, in particular, to the economic factor, CSCE, China and
the effects of “Eurocommunism” and ideological ferment.
5. The Economic Factor. East Europeans are straining to pay for
higher-priced oil and other imports from the USSR as well as Western
advanced technology, raw materials, and semi-manufactures necessary
to modernize and expand their industries. Their export earnings are
far from adequate. Thus far, the very large growth in imports from
the West has been financed by massive hard currency borrowing. East
European and Soviet hard currency indebtedness has risen sharply,
and the debt service ratios of several countries are being watched
closely by creditors. The post-1973 Western inflation/recession has
contributed further to the surge in East European hard currency trade
deficits. Unless East European exports can be greatly increased, trade
will stagnate and it will be difficult for these countries to satisfy rising
consumer expectations. This could produce further political instability
in some East European regimes which have tried to gain popular sup-
port through the satisfaction of consumer demand.
6. CSCE. The Helsinki Final Act provisions on human rights have
had considerable psychological impact in Eastern Europe, stirring
Soviet and East European leadership concerns. They were cited, for
example, not only by the “Charter 77” dissidents in Prague but also
by the vast majority of the estimated 100,000 or more East Germans
who have sought to emigrate legally to the West.
7. China. The enhanced international role of China and Peking’s
independent stand in the communist world poses serious problems
for Moscow. Deepening Chinese relations with the U.S., Western
Europe and Japan have generated some Soviet concerns. The USSR is
thus all the more likely to oppose most efforts at political innovation
in Eastern Europe as threatening to its own interests.
8. “Eurocommunism”/Ideological Ferment. The stands of the Italian,
French and Spanish communist parties, and the positions of the Yugo-
slav and Romanian regimes, have had a marked effect on intellectuals
and more independent-minded party members in Eastern Europe.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
These developments, together with the obvious irrelevance of the ruling
ideology—both morally and in terms of pragmatic governing—are
likely to be an important source of continuing tension in the Soviet
Union and in East European states. This ferment so far has been limited
largely to intellectuals and generally presents no genuine security prob-
lem. However, Soviet worry about how such ideas could infect East
European ruling parties has contributed to Moscow’s rigid attitude
toward CSCE implementation.
9. These factors of economic decline and frustrated political “possi-
bilities” have increased the sense of popular dissatisfaction with East
European regimes. As a result, the next decade may see a rise in social
and political tensions there. These occasionally may take the form of
civil disturbances. The most likely pattern will be one of increased
pressure on the party leadership by elite groups, both within and
outside of the party, to permit some devolution of power to more
“modern” elements in society. Such long-term political dynamics will
be viewed with great concern in Moscow.
10. With Eastern Europe, and at home, Soviet leaders are faced
with a conflict between the CPSU imperative of hegemony and the
rising demands of equality. Brezhnev’s response has been a pragmatic
combination of holding to a firm line where possible (e.g., East Ger-
many, Czechoslovakia, and Bulgaria) and grudging acceptance of grad-
ual reform or autonomy where necessary (e.g., Poland/Hungary;
Romania/Albania). The CPSU has taken a similar tough approach
domestically. Toward East European regimes—as with Soviet society—
the Soviet leadership has preferred, where necessary and possible, to
shift the terms of debate and conflict from political to economic matters.
In the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe, consumerism and economic
aid constitute major expressions of this strategy. Soviet aid to Poland,
following the June 1976 price riots, is a case in point.
11. From a Soviet standpoint, this policy suffers from two basic
defects. First, it has no natural terminal point. Gradual appeasement of
East European demands—on economic issues, liberalization, or foreign
policy autonomy—inevitably feeds rather than satiates East European
appetites. Secondly, with its own major economic—and potential
energy—problems, the USSR has neither the capacity nor the desire to
divert scarce economic resources from internal Soviet requirements to
the needs of more developed East European economies. Moreover, it
is Western technology that is most relevant to East European and Soviet
economic needs.
12. These two factors have important ramifications for Soviet/
East European relations and consequent Western policy. The dynamic
feature of this relationship offers long-term hope to East Europeans
and poses a long-term threat to tight Soviet control. It also suggests

Eastern Europe Region
the possibility of occasional eruptions when East European hopes and
Soviet fears collide.
13. The development of East-West trade and appropriate Western
technology transfers has enormous relevance and appeal to the coming
educated generation of East Europeans. In time, expansion of East-
West economic relations could lead to shifts in trade patterns and to
some reduction of East European economic dependency on Moscow;
this has occurred to some extent already in Romania and Poland.
On the other hand, all East European states remain fundamentally
dependent on the USSR for markets and for the supply of oil (except
Romania) and other raw materials. However tight the future Soviet
economic and petroleum pinch, Moscow is unlikely to permit this basic
political reality to change. Finally, East European indebtedness and
bleak export prospects pose serious obstacles to sustained Western
commercial credits, and Western countries have other high priority
demands on their limited resources.
14. Soviet leaders are determined to maintain overall control in
East European politics, through military force if necessary. But they
also seek to fend off East European pressures for change with partial
concessions. How this balance evolves could be a major factor for
Europe in the 1980’s.
II. East European Foreign Policies
15. Against the above analysis, this section describes the endeavors
of East European states to delineate nationally-based foreign policies.
Those efforts occur primarily in their private bilateral consultations
with Moscow prior to multilateral Warsaw Pact and CEMA confer-
ences, where the Soviets expect and generally obtain obeisance. The
same approach is used concerning East-West conferences, such as
MBFR and CSCE, where the limited East European influence must be
exercised in private bilateral meetings with the Russians.
16. With the exception of Yugoslavia, Albania and Romania, Soviet
control over East European foreign policy clearly is the norm. Nonethe-
less, there are some variations relating to particular East European
national concerns.
YUGOSLAVIA
17. When considering foreign policy autonomy in Eastern Europe,
Yugoslavia must immediately be put into a category separate from the
Warsaw Pact member countries. Yugoslavia’s foreign policy is made
exclusively in Belgrade. Non-alignment, which sets Yugoslavia apart
from both the major alliance systems in Europe, remains the key pillar
of Yugoslav foreign policy. On East-West issues, including CSCE, Yugo-
slavia seeks to play a moderating role and to maintain an arms-length

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
balance between the U.S. and USSR. On North-South economic issues,
Yugoslavia champions the interests of the developing countries and
supports demands for a New International Economic Order, while
promoting dialogue between developed and undeveloped countries.
On global political issues, Yugoslavia attempts to exercise a moderating
influence but invariably goes along with the non-aligned consensus.
Within the non-aligned movement, Yugoslavia has shown great con-
cern over Cuban efforts to push the movement toward closer affinity
with the USSR and other Communist countries.
18. Belgrade seeks to maintain good relations with all countries,
particularly the major powers, and has generally managed to do this.
In the past two years, Tito has visited the USSR and the U.S., as well
as China, France and Britain. Tito’s efforts to improve relations with
these countries are intended in large part to insure Yugoslavia’s contin-
ued independence and territorial integrity after his departure from the
political scene. The recent Yugoslav effort to improve relations with
China—including the recent visit of Hua Kuo-feng to Belgrade—has
had an adverse effect on Yugoslav-Soviet relations, despite repeated
assurances by Yugoslavia that its relations with one country were not
directed against any other country.
19. As in the conduct of foreign affairs, the Yugoslav leadership
insists on maintaining independence in its domestic policies, which
are devised to meet the country’s rather singular needs and traditions.
A particular form of federalism has developed to accommodate the
diverse political and regional characteristics of Yugoslavia. From a
rigidly Stalinist state in the immediate post-war period, the domestic
system in Yugoslavia has evolved into the most liberal in Eastern
Europe, with considerable freedom of movement and emigration,
access to foreign publications and radio broadcasts and relative toler-
ance of cultural expression. Significant restrictions exist, however, on
freedom of political expression and activity.
20. In the economic sector the Yugoslavs practice a kind of “market
socialism” not found elsewhere in the communist world; the concept
and practice of “self-management” are particularly unique. Belgrade
maintains ties with both CEMA and the EC. Foreign investment—
within limits—is encouraged in Yugoslavia.
21. Although the leadership is now preparing for the post-Tito
era, with all its attendant uncertainties and imponderables, Yugoslav
leaders insist that long-successful policies—non-alignment and self-
management—will be continued after Tito and that the Yugoslav com-
mitment to independence, territorial integrity and sovereignty will not
be altered.
ROMANIA
22. Romania is the only Warsaw Pact member state which has been
able to reduce significantly its economic and political dependence on

Eastern Europe Region
the Soviet Union, assert policies that are opposed by other Pact mem-
bers and assume an independent international role. Since the early
1960s the Romanians have gradually established political and economic
ties to the United States, Western Europe, the non-aligned movement
and other independent communist entities—especially Yugoslavia,
China and the Eurocommunists—as a counter to Soviet leverage. In
the process Bucharest has pursued a number of independent positions,
inter alia:
—willingness to conclude a trade agreement with the U.S. and
comply with the Jackson-Vanik amendment;
—opposition to economic integration within CEMA and military
integration within the Warsaw Pact;
—non-participation in the Czechoslovak invasion;
—support for the rights of all communist parties to pursue their
own course;
—membership in such organizations as the IMF and participation
in the “Group of 77”; and,
—retention of diplomatic ties with Israel and playing an intermedi-
ary role in regional crises, most notably in the Middle East, where
Ceausescu helped facilitate Sadat’s visit to Israel.
23. In 1978 Romania strengthened its ties to those states which are
perceived as major counters to Moscow. The most dramatic part of
this campaign was the unprecedented visit of Hua Kuo-feng to Bucha-
rest. The Hua visit set the stage for a heightening of Soviet-Romanian
tension, which culminated in Ceausescu’s public criticism of Moscow
in the aftermath of the November Warsaw Pact summit. In five major
speeches, Ceausescu indirectly rebuked the Soviet Union for seeking
increased military expenditures by Pact members and for attempts to
improve Pact command and control mechanisms that would negate
Romania’s sovereign control over its armed forces. Couching his cri-
tique in highly nationalistic terms, Ceausescu sought to rally the popu-
lation behind him once again in defiance of Moscow.
24. Appeals to Romanian nationalism and independence are used
by Ceausescu both to counter Soviet designs and to offset public disen-
chantment with Romania’s standard of living and authoritarian politi-
cal system. Foreign policy independence has been effective in bridging
some of the gap between the population and the regime.
POLAND
25. Poland was the first among the Warsaw Pact countries to
develop a positive relationship with the U.S. and to resume cultivation
of traditionally close ties with such Western countries as France, Britain
and Italy. This has led to a Western presence in Poland which far

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
exceeds that which exists in most other Warsaw Pact countries. Despite
the occasional strains it has produced in its relations with the Soviet
Union, the Gierek regime has given every indication of continuing its
moderate, pragmatic approach to Poland’s cooperation with the West.
The regime continues to pursue a course of relative restraint toward
vocal political dissidents; it continues at least an outward conciliation
toward the thriving Roman Catholic Church, which has been greatly
strengthened by the accession to the Papacy of John Paul II; and, in
the interest of stimulating improved economic performance, it has
shown some desire to encourage private farmers who cultivate about
80 percent of all arable land.
26. Moscow has grudgingly tolerated these deviations because it
wants, above all, stability in strategically located Poland, and knows
that cruder forms of interference or repression could lead to an
upheaval that would necessitate an unwanted military intervention.
In return, Poland faithfully supports Soviet foreign policy objectives,
as well as the Soviet economic integration goals in Eastern Europe.
Although only half of Poland’s trade is with CEMA countries, its inter-
ests in the area as a market for its products and dependence on Soviet
raw materials are genuine. Warsaw’s support of major Soviet foreign
policy goals also derives from an historically based fear that Moscow
might one day revise its attitude on the German question, to Poland’s
disadvantage.
27. The major question-mark surrounds Poland’s economic situa-
tion, which has deteriorated in recent years due to five successive bad
harvests; stagnation in Western export markets; and a failure to date
of major investments in Western capital equipment to pay off. As a
result, Poland’s external hard currency indebtedness has grown mark-
edly. Generous Western public and commercial credits have been
granted but future prospects for Poland’s external economic picture
are cloudy and Warsaw faces some tough political and economic
choices ahead.
HUNGARY
28. Having gained power in the Soviet invasion of 1956, Hungarian
party leader Kadar consolidated his position in the early 1960s and
has since displayed skill and pragmatism in promoting Hungary’s
national interests, without violating essential Soviet desiderata. He has
thus achieved a rather firm political base and a measure of popularity.
Kadar has in more recent years departed from orthodox Bloc patterns
in such key areas as:
—the ten-year-old economic reforms (New Economic Mechanism),
which provide for a variety of incentives and other market forces
to operate;

Eastern Europe Region
—a measure of accommodation with the Roman Catholic and Prot-
estant churches; and
—a relatively relaxed political-cultural atmosphere, including the
cultivation of ties with Hungarians living abroad.
29. While remaining a loyal Soviet ally, Kadar has for the past two
years used the CSCE umbrella to pursue a deliberate but low-keyed
foreign policy aimed at improving relations with the West.
To this end, Kadar has:
—visited four West European countries in less than four years
(Austria, Italy, West Germany and France);
—taken a moderate attitude toward West Europe’s Eurocommunist
and socialist parties; and
—promoted ties with the U.S. Hungary’s relatively liberal internal
and emigration policies have facilitated the U.S. granting of MFN status
and the return of the Crown of St. Stephen, the symbol of Hungarian
national independence.
30. Unlike most other Warsaw Pact countries, Hungary has
eschewed criticism of Romania and Yugoslavia for receiving Hua or
for Ceausescu’s refusal to sign several documents submitted at the
recent Warsaw Pact summit in Moscow. In such international organiza-
tions as the UN and in other public fora, Budapest has increasingly
pursued matters of vital or major significance to Hungarian national
interest, while not antagonizing the Soviet Union.
GERMAN DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC
31. East Germany is of course a special case in East Central Europe.
The GDR’s communist political system and highly cautious political
leadership reflect the continued, anomalous position of the East Ger-
man state. The GDR remains wholly dependent on an occupying force
of twenty Soviet divisions. The Berlin Wall remains a grim reminder of
the regime’s unpopularity. Despite widespread diplomatic recognition
from the international community, the Four Powers (U.S., UK, France
and USSR) retain their post-war rights and responsibilities for Germany
and Berlin. While quiescent since the 1971 quadripartite agreement,
Berlin, located at the center of Europe, remains a potential East-West
flashpoint.
32. In the absence of a meaningful separate East German national-
ism, the Honecker regime has sought to bridge the gap between party
and population through policies aimed at boosting the standard of
living. East Germans, for example, are permitted to use Western cur-
rency to purchase Western goods in GDR specialty shops. “Consumer-
ism” has helped generally to meet some of the population’s rising
expectations—generated in part by West German TV broadcasts which

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
cover 80 percent of East Germany—for a better material life. More
recently, Honecker has sought other bases of support, particularly in
the Evangelical (Lutheran) Church, which has been promised sweeping
concessions that include access to media broadcasts. If these are imple-
mented, the Church could emerge as one of the most influential in
Eastern Europe. The regime will want to ensure that it confines the
Church’s role strictly to clerical—non-political—matters.
33. East German foreign policy is tied to Soviet foreign policy,
including an increased presence in Africa. To the extent they diverge,
the GDR tends to press Moscow to adopt more rigid policies in the
East-West sphere in order to avert increased Western contacts. The
East Germans are particularly concerned that their CSCE Basket III
human rights commitments could arouse public expectations which,
when unfilled, could lead to popular discontent. This foreign policy
posture reflects the GDR policy of Abgrenzung, or separation, of the
two German states.
34. There have been times when Moscow’s Western policy was
seen as contravening East Germany’s fundamental need to assert its
sovereign state identity. In the opening phases of detente, it thus tried
to slow down or resist what it viewed as Soviet concessions to the
FRG without sufficient benefits to the GDR. More recently, there are
indications that the GDR is less than enthusiastic—given its growing
economic problems—about Soviet proposals for increased military
spending by Warsaw Pact members. For the most part, however, these
challenges have been and are contained by Moscow which, with 400,000
troops in the GDR, still clearly sets the main directions of East German
foreign policy activity.
BULGARIA
35. Bulgaria is usually considered the Soviet Union’s most loyal
ally, and Bulgarian leader Zhivkov the most reliable associate. We
know of no instance in which the Bulgarians have opposed Soviet
objectives in foreign policy, even when these objectives may run counter
to Bulgarian foreign policy interests.
36. This is particularly evident in the instances of Balkan coopera-
tion and the Soviet exploitation of the Bulgarian-Yugoslav dispute over
Macedonia:
—The Bulgarians have rejected various initiatives of other Balkan
countries to promote multilateral commerce and cooperation, appar-
ently because of Soviet opposition;
—There also is little doubt that the intensity of polemics and the
state of Yugoslav-Bulgarian relations over Macedonia is influenced,
if not dictated, by Moscow’s desire to increase political pressure on
Yugoslavia.

Eastern Europe Region
37. More recently, Zhivkov has traveled to Africa and promoted
Bulgarian relations with selected African countries in an effort to further
Soviet aims in Africa. Finally, there are indications that the Bulgarians
have sought to improve their relations with Albania—again acting as
a Soviet proxy.
38. Party leader Zhivkov’s long tenure in office and his close rela-
tionship with the Kremlin have been accompanied by the appearance
of a stable regime—perhaps in some respects the most stable in Eastern
Europe over the past 20 years. Intellectual dissidence—in contrast to
Czechoslovakia, Poland, GDR, and, even, Romania—has been minimal
and easily controlled. There has been no worker unrest of significance
and political factionalism has not threatened Zhivkov’s position. How-
ever, Zhivkov has recently carried out changes in the Party and State
leaderships which might have been motivated in part by real or poten-
tial opposition to his policies. More likely, these changes were carried
out to improve economic performance and efficiency and to install
younger, more vigorous leaders. Until recently, the Bulgarian leader-
ship was one of the oldest in Eastern Europe.
CZECHOSLOVAKIA
39. Since 1969, in order to accommodate Moscow, the Czechoslovak
regime has been one of the most internally repressive and externally
sycophantic in Eastern Europe. Under the close aegis of Moscow,
Czechoslovak leaders have been carrying out the most widespread
purges in Czechoslovak Party history and maintained tight controls
over all aspects of Czechoslovak life—including punitive measures
against political/human rights dissidents who sought to have the
regime honor its commitments to the CSCE Final Act. The Prague
regime’s domestic repressions at times seem to be an embarrassment
to other East European regimes and even the Soviets in their relations
with the West. Although both the Soviet and Czechoslovak leaderships
reportedly have considered alternative courses of action to present
hardline policies in Czechoslovakia, there are no indications that these
policies will be modified. Realization of its vast unpopularity has made
the Czechoslovak regime even more unimaginative and reluctant to
undertake independent action (such as meaningful reform to improve
the economy). It has, as a result, followed the Soviet foreign policy line
wherever possible in order to prove its loyalty to Moscow. Perhaps
more than any other regime in Eastern Europe, Prague has tried to
buy political apathy through outright concessions to material wants
(e.g., weekend cottages, travel abroad, automobiles).
40.
Soviet
domination
of
Czechoslovakia
appears
virtually
complete, with the Prague leadership at times more subservient in
following Soviet foreign policy than even Moscow would seem to wish.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
Prague has acted as a proxy for Moscow in propaganda attacks on the
West in general and the U.S. in particular, particularly when for tactical
reasons the Soviets preferred to be either silent or moderate in their
commentaries. In the past, Prague has played a considerable role in
Soviet foreign policy strategy by acting as a penetration agent among
developing countries, particularly because the Czechoslovaks were
more acceptable than the Soviets to these countries. This role has dimin-
ished over the past years, in large part because Prague’s economic
difficulties at home have made it impossible for it to play such a role
and also because other East European regimes have acted as penetration
agents in various regions—e.g., East Germany in Africa. Finally, the
cautious attitude of the Prague regime in borrowing from the West and
also in pursuing cultural contacts have generally resulted in limiting
Czechoslovakia’s ties with the West.
ALBANIA
41. Albania’s xenophobic, isolationist foreign policy is unique
among the communist regimes in Europe. The Tirana regime has
refused to countenance any improvement of relations with the U.S.
and several other Western countries until all its demands have been
realized. It also continues its unrelenting struggle against the “social
imperialism” of the USSR and, more recently, against China.
42. Albania has been quite selective in its establishment of diplo-
matic and trade relations with other countries, particularly in Western
Europe. Despite the cessation of economic assistance from China—
Tirana’s last benefactor—there are at present no signs that the Alba-
nians intend to modify their intransigent ideological policies. Albania
has hinted at its interest in increasing commercial and perhaps other
links with some Western and Third World countries. Tirana’s relations
with neighboring Greece have improved somewhat since the break
with China. But there has been no such improvement with neighboring
Yugoslavia, whom the Albanians revile as revisionist and fear as a
larger neighbor with a substantial Albanian minority population. The
Albanians have also refused multilateral Balkan cooperation endeav-
ors, insisting that such endeavors be conducted on a bilateral basis.
43. The Tirana regime is the most repressive in Eastern Europe,
and the Albanian standard of living continues to be the lowest in
Europe. Any hopes that it would improve in the near future evaporated
with the cessation of Chinese economic assistance. The regime has
carried out incessant strident propaganda campaigns which rail against
foreign influences, urge the population to greater sacrifice and eco-
nomic effort, and demand strict ideological conformity with the policies
of the leadership.

Eastern Europe Region
31.
Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance to
President Carter1
Washington, February 26, 1979
SUBJECT
Presidential Determination to Provide Financial Assistance to U.S. Voluntary
Agencies Assisting Political Refugees from Eastern Europe
The American voluntary agencies assisting in the resettlement of
political refugees coming from the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe
to the United States are having serious financial difficulties. These
agencies depend heavily on financial assistance from the Department
of State. Due to a sharp increase in the number of refugees being cared
for and resettled during calendar year 1978 (from a projected 17,000
to an actual figure of approximately 24,000 refugees) as well as inflation
and the decline in the value of the dollar, funds appropriated for the
European refugee program for calendar year 1978 were exhausted
during the fall.
The agencies have continued to care for, process, and resettle refu-
gees at their own expense, despite a funding shortfall totalling nearly
$8 million. (Details of the shortfall are shown in the attached table.)2
As a result, the voluntary agencies accumulated substantial debts and
have had to curtail services; some may soon be forced to cease accepting
responsibility for new refugees, irrespective of the rate of refugee flow.
Such a development would pose a threat to U.S. foreign policy and
humanitarian concerns, for these agencies have been unique and faith-
ful partners in U.S. refugee efforts throughout the world dating back
to the end of World War II. It is in our national interest to ensure that
these agencies are able to continue their important work, at a time
when Soviet and Eastern European emigration continues at extraordi-
nary high levels.
The Department of State has been moving on two fronts to resolve
the financial problems of the agencies, working closely with representa-
tives from OMB and the NSC. First, the supplemental budget request
for fiscal year 1979 will provide funds to make up the October-to-
December shortfall. The Administration has asked the Congress to
treat the refugee supplemental on an urgent basis, separately from
the government-wide supplemental. (During the week of February 20,
forwarded the memorandum to the President on March 16. (See Document 33.)
2 Neither attachment was attached.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
OMB will present you an upward revision in the supplemental for
refugees, requested by the Department based on the latest information
on refugee flows and careful analysis of the appropriate U.S. response.)
Second, to provide immediate alleviation to the hardest-hit volun-
tary agencies, and to meet the pre-October shortfall, I am here propos-
ing the provision of $1.13 million from the Emergency Refugee and
Migration Assistance Fund, for which a Presidential Determination is
required. All of this amount will be used for payments equivalent to
resettlement grants at the standard 1978 contract rate ($250 per capita)
to the voluntary agencies who resettled European refugees, without
U.S. compensation, before October 1. The attached table shows the
funding shortfalls, by voluntary agency, during 1978. Only the pre-
October amounts will be met by this drawdown. The October-to-
December shortfall will be met through the FY 1979 supplemental.
Our efforts to use the Emergency Fund for this purpose have been
delayed because of certain steps taken on December 15 by Senator
Inouye for the Senate Appropriations Committee. At that time, in the
course of objecting to a proposed reprogramming action, Senator
Inouye asked the GAO to determine whether the Emergency Fund
could be used as here proposed. Accordingly, we suspended further
action on use of the fund until the GAO ruled. We received its ruling
on February 9. The GAO has fully approved the proposed use of the
Emergency Fund to meet the pre-October shortfall of the voluntary
agencies.
The current balance of the Emergency Fund is $3,290,000, sufficient
to cover this proposed drawdown.
Recommendation
That you sign the attached determination which will make available
up to $1.13 million through the Department of State to American volun-
tary agencies to meet their expenses incurred during 1978 prior to
October 1, in resettling refugees as part of the European portion of the
United States Refugee Program.3
3 No decision is noted on the document.

Eastern Europe Region
32.
Memorandum From Paul Henze of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, March 15, 1979
SUBJECT
CIA’s Book and Periodical Distribution Program for Eastern Europe and USSR
Stan Turner has provided a report (Tab 2)2 in response to your
report on the book program. The report provides striking evidence of
the effectiveness of this program (I have marked in red certain key
passages which I recommend you leaf through if you have time) and
demonstrates that the program has made highly productive use of the
extra funds which you directed be allocated to it nearly two years ago.
The report reveals, however, that the program is being curtailed in
planned. Leveling off (actually slightly reducing) a program such as
this after it has gained momentum from expansion is especially unwise
million) may also not materialize, for the FY 1981 budget process is
likely to entail as much squeezing as we have been through on FY
1980. I am told by highly reliable sources in CIA that there is no good
reason to cut this program; they made an effort to keep it expanding.
They, and I, have the suspicion that Turner, knowing your interest in
it, sacrificed it to OMB’s bookkeepers. Whatever the motivation, I do
not believe we should let this excellent program “plateau off”. Funds
added to it are among the most productive CIA spends for covert
action. In fact, this program constitutes a large part of what is left of
CIA’s covert action program and they constitute most of what we
are doing against our highest-priority target—Eastern Europe and the
USSR. I have prepared a short memorandum from you to Turner
requesting that funds be reprogrammed to permit continued expansion
in FY 1980.
2 Not attached.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
RECOMMENDATION:
That you sign attached memorandum (Tab 1).4
4 At Tab 1 is the undated, draft memorandum. A notation on the draft indicates
that Brzezinski signed it on March 20. In the memorandum, Brzezinski commented:
“The Soviet Union and Eastern Europe are our highest-priority targets for sustained
covert action impact. Money to permit continued expansion of this entire program during
FY 1980 should be found through reprogramming.” Turner responded on April 9, writing
that the Agency “will remain alert to the possibility of reprogramming to provide
additional funds” for the program. However, Turner cautioned that “Fiscal Year 1980
is a very austere budget and, at this point in time, we cannot identify funds available
for such reprogramming.” He added “Will keep looking—” to the memorandum. (Carter
33.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, March 16, 1979
SUBJECT
Determination to Assist Refugees from Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union
In the memorandum at Tab B,2 Cy Vance recommends you deter-
mine that it is important to the national interest that up to $1.13 million
from the U.S. Emergency Refugee Fund be made available to the volun-
tary agencies resettling refugees from Eastern Europe and the Soviet
Union who entered the United States before October 1, 1978. OMB
concurrence is at Tab C.3
Primarily because of the sharp increase in Soviet emigration during
1978, funds appropriated to the Department of State were insufficient
to provide the normal level of Federal assistance to voluntary agencies
resettling refugees accepted by the United States. Although the agencies
continued to process and resettle refugees at their own expense, the
debts incurred could curtail the ability of some agencies to continue
action. Reginald Bartholomew initialed for Brzezinski.
2 Not attached. See Document 31.
3 Attached but not printed is a March 6 memorandum from Edward Sanders of
the Office of Management and Budget to Dodson.

Eastern Europe Region
to accept refugees. As Cy points out, this situation threatens a vital
link in our refugee program.
Because the flow of refugees has remained high, similar funding
shortfalls are anticipated in FY 1979. State intends to handle these
through a supplemental budget request.
RECOMMENDATION
That you sign the determination at Tab A.4
4 Not attached. The Presidential Determination was not found.
34.
Memorandum From Paul Henze of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, April 24, 1979
SUBJECT
Soviet/EE Book Program (S)
Stan Turner won’t give an inch on adding money for the book
program, so our effort to get him to reverse his decision to cut back
on the program for FY 1980 (and not continue the expansion approved
two years ago by the SCC) has to be chalked up as a failure. (S)
In the attached memo2 he says no funds can be found but says
they will keep looking. (S)
My own sources at the Agency indicate that funds are not really
this tight (the Iranian debacle and other shifts have caused a good deal
of budgetary adjustment and money could be found!) but Turner has
made this an issue on which he is unwilling to give in to you. I am
told that further effort to press him on this now will probably only
solidify his position—so the advice is to press during the summer for
allocation of FY-year-end funds. [name not declassified] who is immedi-
ately responsible for this program and a strong supporter of it, promises
ment 32.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
me he will remain alert for possibilities and will signal us when he
thinks pressure from you could have a good effect. I see no alternative
but to content ourselves with this for now—since cuts now contem-
plated do not start until 1 October. (S)
Do you3 AGREE
DISAGREE
3 Brzezinski did not mark either option.
35.
Memorandum Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency
for Marshall Brement of the National Security Council Staff1
Washington, August 6, 1979
SUBJECT
Summary of Memorandum Entitled “Preconditions for Instability Begin to
Accumulate in Eastern Europe” [classification not declassified]
A veteran analyst of East European affairs at CIA takes a look at
recent developments in the area, speculating on whether the conditions
preceding past crises are being recreated. [classification not declassified]
On the economic front, the conditions that have allowed the East
European regimes to give their publics steadily rising standards of
living no longer exist. The regimes will thus soon be deprived on one
of the principal arguments in support of their legitimacy. With growth
rates falling, investment plans cut back, and prices rising, it probably
will not be long before economic expectations are dashed, with all that
implies for increased public restiveness. [classification not declassified]
All the East European members of the Council for Economic Mutual
Assistance are aware that their systems of economic management are
inadequate, and all are talking about, experimenting with, or actually
implementing changes. Experimentation of this sort inevitably leads
to greater tensions between those within these regimes who are con-
Office File, Country Chron File, Box 12, Europe: 1979. Secret. Brement forwarded the
memorandum to Brzezinski under an August 6 covering memorandum noting it was
prepared at his request and that Brzezinski should read it. A stamped notation on the
first page of the covering memorandum indicates that Brzezinski saw it.

Eastern Europe Region
vinced of the need for change and those who feel threatened by it.
[classification not declassified]
Some East European leaders have indicated that they do not believe
Soviet economic leadership is sufficiently sensitive to their needs. Nor
do they believe that their international organizations are facilitating
the pursuit of solutions to their economic problems. One consequence,
therefore, of their economic problems has been the encouragement
of peculiarly national solutions and the strengthening of centrifugal
tendencies. [classification not declassified]
For a model, the East European CEMA regimes may be looking
to Hungary, which has the most advanced program of economic reform.
They do not appear to be looking to the independent national Commu-
nist states of the Balkans, though they may envy the political ability
of these states to seek solutions without subordinating their interests
to those of the USSR. Relations between the independent Communist
states and the USSR are, at best, not improving. [classification not
declassified]
Nationalism, which probably remains the strongest motive force
in Eastern Europe, received a boost from the visit of John Paul II to
Poland.2 The visit will have convinced the Soviets that their position
in Eastern Europe remains dependent of the willingness to enforce
their writ militarily. The visit will also have strengthened the hands
of those in Eastern Europe and the USSR who, already concerned
about ideological contamination through detente, urge more vigorous
vigilance and repression of non-conformists. A heavier air of renewed
repression has already arrived in East Germany and Czechoslovakia.
The people’s political expectations, which had been raised by the Con-
ference on Security and Cooperation in Europe, may soon also be
dashed. [classification not declassified]
At the same time that conditions in Eastern Europe are becoming
more tense, Soviet General Secretary Brezhnev nears the end of his
gradual decline. The Soviet succession process has probably begun;
given the advanced age of Eastern Europe’s leaders, succession pro-
cesses there could coincide. (U)
In sum, then, the author argues that the classic pre-conditions
for a crisis are either in place or can be seen on the horizon. Major
demonstrations of popular dissatisfaction could occur in the not too
far distant future. But because many of the preconditions have just
begun to develop, the situation is probably not yet quite ripe for the
next major turn of events. [classification not declassified]

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
36.
Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the
Department of State (Tarnoff) to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, January 31, 1980
SUBJECT
U.S. Relations with Eastern Europe in 1980
The attached paper on U.S. policy toward Eastern Europe in the
year ahead was reviewed by the Interagency Group on Europe on
January 24. The NSC, Treasury, Commerce, Agriculture, ICA, Defense,
CIA, USTR and the Export-Import Bank participated in this review.
We have also consulted in a preliminary fashion with our allies at
NATO and in Eastern European capitals concerning their future policies
toward Eastern Europe.
At the Interagency Group meeting, there was general agreement
on the analysis contained in the paper and the central policy recommen-
dation—that we continue an activist policy in Eastern Europe designed
to preserve the gains we have made in the last three years and to
promote the goals of PD 21—domestic liberalization and/or foreign
policy independence. It was generally agreed that we would have to
adjust our specific actions and initiatives to take account of the reactions
of individual Eastern European countries to the situations in Afghani-
stan and Iran.
Since the Interagency Group meeting, the Soviets have evidently
increased pressures on Eastern European countries to follow Moscow’s
foreign policy lead. The Czechoslovaks postponed a planned Genscher
visit referring to the “complicated international situation.”2 After hear-
ing several times from the Hungarians that they wanted a visit to the
U.S. by Parliamentary President Apro to go ahead despite U.S.-Soviet
tensions, the Hungarians notified us on January 30 that the visit would
have to be postponed because of “pressing parliamentary business at
home.3 In both these cases, the Soviets appear to be acting to reign in
vak Government had postponed the Genscher visit. (National Archives, RG 59, Central
Foreign Policy File, D800041–1098)
was postponing his visit to the United States for “unforeseen domestic political duties.”
Noting that the Foreign Ministry and Parliament were given only short notice of the
cancellation, the Embassy concluded: “We can only assume with a high degree of certainty
that Hungary only reluctantly postponed the visit” and that “the Russian lid on Eastern
Europe is being screwed tighter.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
File, D800053–0746)

Eastern Europe Region
Eastern European desires to conduct business as usual with the West.
This argues for a policy of trying harder to maintain the ground we
have gained recently in our relations with Eastern Europe.
The area-wide measures and country-specific measures recom-
mended in the attached paper are designed to implement this goal. The
Interagency Group agreed to all of them with the following exceptions
which require further consideration or policy guidance.
—Export Controls.4 There was general agreement in the IG that the
ability to differentiate between export licensing treatment for the Soviet
Union and the Warsaw Pact countries of Eastern Europe would be a
valuable foreign policy tool in encouraging ties with Eastern European
countries which display independence in foreign and domestic policy.
Any foreign policy controls on U.S. exports to the Soviet Union imposed
in response to the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan clearly should not
automatically be applied to Eastern European countries—particularly
those whose support for the Soviet action has been weak or withheld.
However, it was recognized that it would be futile to try to decide on
the applicability of security controls to Eastern European countries
before the nature of these controls has been decided upon.
One possible way of differentiating between the Soviet Union and
the countries of Eastern Europe would be to maintain existing controls
for them while tightening up for the Soviet Union. For some countries
in Eastern Europe we might go further and institute a liberal policy of
COCOM exceptions for Eastern European countries with appropriate
end-user controls. In any case, our ability to gain Western European
agreement to more stringent security controls on exports to Eastern
Europe is bound to be strongly resisted. This issue might best be dealt
with in the SCC discussion of export controls on the Soviet Union once
a policy on security controls has been decided upon.
—Yugoslav Military Sales. Steps are being taken to implement “a
more forthcoming” military sales policy responsive to Yugoslav
requests. DOD is reexamining the systems the Yugoslavs have
expressed an interest in with a view to releasing more, but problems
of availability and constraints against transfer of sensitive technology
limit what we can do. The NSC, State and DOD will have to keep the
military sales program under continuing review to insure that we
respond as promptly and fully as possible to Yugoslav interests.
—PL 480 for Yugoslavia. We are reviewing with Agriculture and
IDCA the possibility of a modest PL 480 program for Yugoslavia which
would permit it to acquire U.S. soybeans for cattle feed. Even a small
grant or loan would ease Yugoslavia’s balance of payments problem
4 See Document 13.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
and help to boost private creditor confidence. If it proves impossible
to allocate significant PL 480 funds to Yugoslavia within existing alloca-
tions, a budget decision might be needed. An alternative might be a
small one-time ESF grant of $5–7 million under the proposed ESF
Contingency Fund.
—Romanian Access to Hampton Roads. Permitting Romanian vessels
to call at Hampton Roads instead of Baltimore for coal would greatly
reduce Romanian transport costs and be seen as a significant political
gesture at a time when Bucharest fears Soviet economic pressures.
There is strong Navy objection to allowing any Warsaw Pact vessel into
the Hampton Roads area for security reasons. We are asking Secretary
Brown to review Navy’s objections to see if they are of overriding
importance.
—Possible Membership in the IMF. This may also need further
thought. Given current Soviet pressures on Eastern Europe, we think
it highly unlikely that the Polish leadership would take the step of
joining the IMF, although this might help bolster shakey creditor confi-
dence. We will be consulting with Poland’s Western creditors to deter-
mine whether eventually this or some other steps such as a non-IMF
stabilization program is required to correct the deteroriating Polish
financial position.
—Cultural Agreement with the GDR. Some IG members questioned
the appropriateness of concluding a cultural agreement with the GDR
at this time while others argue that such an agreement is inherently
in our interest and should be pursued. We will continue to review this
question in light of the evolution of Berlin’s position on Afghanistan
and Iran. Should the GDR be particularly shrill in its criticism of the
U.S., we would not conclude a cultural agreement.
Peter Tarnoff

Eastern Europe Region
Attachment
Paper Prepared in the Department of State5
Washington, undated
SUBJECT
U.S. Relations with Eastern Europe in 1980
Deteriorating US-Soviet relations and Soviet efforts to enforce con-
formity in Eastern Europe threatened the improving trend in US rela-
tions with Eastern Europe in 1979. The Soviet invasion of Afghanistan
raises the question of whether we should continue a policy of trying
to strengthen relations with individual Eastern Europe countries which
follow Moscow’s foreign policy line.
We do not believe that the invasion of Afghanistan should cause
us to revamp our basic policy toward Eastern Europe.6
—There is no evidence that Moscow’s Warsaw Pact allies were
consulted about Afghanistan or have contributed anything except
propaganda support and diplomatic support at the UN.7
—No amount of pressure on Eastern Europe—short of military
threats or a policy of economic denial which could lead to massive
unrest—would induce Moscow to alter its policy elsewhere in the
world.
—We have substantial interests of our own in Eastern Europe and
abandoning the area as a Soviet sphere of influence would be playing
into the Kremlin’s hands.
—Pursuing an activist policy in Eastern Europe is a way of getting
at Soviet sensitivities.
5 Secret. A version of this paper was sent to all European posts in telegram 34197,
European posts that U.S. policy toward Eastern Europe in the wake of the Soviet invasion
of Afghanistan was under review, but that the Department was leaning toward continuing
a policy of differentiation among the Eastern European countries. (National Archives,
1, the Embassy recommended that the policy of differentiation should be based on
“realistic criteria and a judgment of how much each country can resist Soviet pressure”
since “the effects of Soviet pressure will be to force another downturn in relations with
provided guidance on how to respond to the ongoing Soviet propaganda campaign
justifying their invasion of Afghanistan. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
Policy File, D800058–0925)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
—Our allies are determined to continue activist policies in Eastern
Europe; a hard-line US policy towards these countries would not be
supported by our allies and could lead to increased resistance to steps
against the Soviet Union.
—A policy of cutting back our ties with Eastern Europe would
ease Soviet efforts to enforce conformity in foreign and domestic policy
and leave the Romanians and Yugoslavs further isolated.
—At the same time a policy of business as usual with Eastern
European countries regardless of their position on issues of importance
to us such as Afghanistan or the US hostages in Iran would undermine
our credibility with the governments and peoples concerned.
These factors argue for an activist policy of engagement with East-
ern Europe, designed to preserve the gains we have made in the last
three years and to promote the goals of PD–21—domestic liberalization
and/or foreign policy independence. Such a policy would:
—Respond to the interest of the Eastern Europeans—as already
expressed to us in recent days on a number of occasions—in finding
ways to prevent U.S.-Soviet differences from adversely affecting their
relations with us and with the West as a whole;
—Preserve, to the degree possible, the progress (in trade, claims
negotiations, family reunification, etc.) we have achieved in our
relations with the Eastern European countries;
—Reassure the West Europeans by demonstrating that we remain
sensitive to their special stake in good East-West relations and their
desire to continue an activist policy in Eastern Europe;
—Remind Moscow that we do not concede Eastern Europe as their
sphere of influence and that we have interests and influence in Eastern
Europe that we intend to continue to assert actively.
In following such an overall policy approach, it will be necessary
to adjust our specific actions and initiatives, depending on the public
and private reactions of the individual Eastern European countries to
the situations in Afghanistan and Iran. Our actions should be tailored
to move us closer to our longer-term objective of strengthening Eastern
European independence from the Soviet Union. Our planned actions
are reversible, can be implemented or withheld to match the changing
situation and, while pegged to 1980, have meaning for the longer term.
We intend to make it plain to the governments of the individual Warsaw
Pact countries that we want to pursue a differential policy but our
ability to do so will inevitably depend to a considerable degree on
their behavior regarding the issues of Iran and Afghanistan and their
willingness to improve relations with us despite Soviet pressure to cut
back. We have already told the Bulgarians, East Germans, Czechoslo-
vaks, Poles and Hungarians that excessive rhetoric on Afghanistan will
have a negative effect on the climate of our bilateral relations.

Eastern Europe Region
The area-wide measures we recommend in pursuit of such a pol-
icy are:
—Differentiate between U.S. export licensing treatment for the
Soviet Union and the Warsaw Pact countries of Eastern Europe. [N.B.
A decision on the implementation of such a policy must await a final
decision on a new area-wide export control policy.]8
—Inform Eastern European governments that any diversion of
grain or technology to the Soviet Union would lead us to immediately
cut off such exports to them.9
—Consult with the West Europeans, as appropriate, in NATO, the
OECD, the European Community, and bilaterally, to pursue our shared
objectives throughout Eastern Europe and to focus particularly on
policies that would support Yugoslav and Romanian independence.
—Reaffirm US policy of encouraging trade and financial ties with
CEMA countries other than the USSR in view of the fact that some
members of the US banking community are uncertain about our policy.
The country-specific measures we would take in pursuit of this policy
would depend to an important degree on the given country’s behavior
concerning Afghanistan and Iran. Therefore, a brief discussion of each
country’s reaction to these two issues precedes the catalog of measures
which might be taken.
YUGOSLAVIA
Yugoslavia has strongly and publicly condemned the Soviet inva-
sion of Afghanistan and worked with a number of nonaligned countries
to obtain a UN General Assembly resolution censuring the Soviets.
Tito has publicly opposed the taking of the hostages in Iran, and the
Yugoslavs are cooperating quietly in working on the Iranians to secure
their release.
We should intensify our efforts to strengthen all aspects of our
relations and encourage our NATO allies to do likewise. Over the near
term, we should give priority to the following steps:
—Military Sales. Improve our responsiveness to Yugoslav requests
for purchases of military hardware.10
8 All brackets are in the original.
to the Soviet Union in response to the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. Faced with a
projected shortage of grain, the Soviet Union sought to obtain replacement grain from
the world market. As sales of U.S. grain to Eastern Europe were not affected, the adminis-
tration stressed to Eastern European Governments that any diversion, transshipment,
or replacement of grain to the Soviet Union would be dimly viewed in Washington.
10 See Document 285.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
—Political Support. Give visible demonstration of our support for
Yugoslavia’s independence via high-level visits and a continuation of
Sixth Fleet port calls. The Secretary’s visit should be rescheduled as
soon as possible, bearing in mind the factors arising from Tito’s death
or prolonged serious incapacitation, and consideration given to an
early stop by a ranking Yugoslav official. A possible brief stop by the
President in Yugoslavia in conjunction with his participation in the
Economic Summit in Venice would be extremely useful. Furthermore,
the implications for Yugoslavia of the Afghanistan invasion give even
greater weight to our recommendation that the President attend the
eventual funeral ceremonies for Tito and that we seek a strong, coordi-
nated allied expression of support for Yugoslavia following Tito’s
death. We will strengthen our effort to deter and punish anti-GOY
terrorism in the U.S. and abroad.
—Economic Relations. Continue to make clear to the European Com-
munity our support for a prompt Yugoslav-EC economic agreement
which strengthens Yugoslavia’s ties with the West but which does not
require Yugoslavia to grant reverse preferences to the Community.11
—Grant the Yugoslav airline (JAT) landing rights in Chicago and
Los Angeles, if a formal request is received.
—Give increased high-level attention to the visit of Foreign Trade
Secretary Rotar in mid-March.
—Consider including Yugoslavia in the PL–480 program.
—Continue to seek additional funding for S&T exchanges in
accordance with our earlier promise to Yugoslavia.
ROMANIA
Apart from an indirect reference by Ceausescu in his speech to the
Romanian Party Congress in November, Romania has issued no public
statement condemning the taking of the American hostages. Media
coverage has been very sparse and limited to factual reporting. On the
other hand, the Foreign Minister has told us that in late November
the Haferkamp-Cooper exchange related to the EC/Yugoslavia trade agreement. Wilhelm
Haferkamp, the Commissioner for External Relations and Vice President of the European
Commission, wrote that he noted “with satisfaction that the United States recognizes
the great importance of strengthening Yugoslavia’s relationships with the West and
that you welcome the prospect of an EEC/Yugoslavia economic agreement.” (National
Brussels, October 23, the Embassy reported: “Yugoslavs showed an unexpectedly urgent
desire to conclude new economic cooperation agreement with EC, apparently because
of fear of Soviets and less concern with non-aligned image” during discussions with the
EC negotiating team visiting Belgrade earlier that month. (National Archives, RG 59,

Eastern Europe Region
Ceausescu conveyed a message to Khomeini in an effort to bring about
a resolution of the hostage problem.12
On Afghanistan, Romania has once again played a maverick role
within the Warsaw Pact13 by issuing public statements indirectly but
strongly condemning the Soviet action in Afghanistan, by not speaking
out in defense of the Soviets in the UN Security Council debate and
not participating in the UN General Assembly vote, and by continuing
to refrain from recognizing the new Afghan regime.
We should increase our efforts to support Romania’s independent
actions by strengthening our relations on bilateral and international
issues, and encourage our NATO allies to do the same. Romania’s
status within the Warsaw Pact and CEMA creates both problems and
opportunities.
—Reschedule the Secretary’s visit.
—Invite Foreign Minister Andrei for an official return visit to Wash-
ington within the following six months.
—Give special attention to the CSCE bilateral discussions, including
the Special Experts’ Group on military security. The U.S. side should
be led by a senior Department official since Romanian delegation will
be headed by a Deputy Foreign Minister. We should arrange high-
level meetings for the Deputy Minister on non-CSCE issues as well.
—Show our interest in and, when possible, give our support to
Romanian initiatives in international organizations, especially those
that relate to peaceful settlement of disputes and good neighborliness.
—If there is any supplemental allocation of CCC credits, high
priority should be given to Romania’s outstanding request.
—Encourage visits by a group from DOD’s Army War College as
well as a visit by White House Fellows (in conjunction with visits to
other countries in the area).
—Reallocate unused FY 80 fisheries allocation by drawing on fishing
quotas previously reserved for the Soviet Union.
—Reexamine Romania’s request for commercial access to Hampton
Roads. [N.B. While this would be desirable for foreign policy reasons,
JCS objects strongly on security grounds. This question should be
reviewed by OSD.]
—Grant approval for Romanian government trade offices in
Atlanta and Houston.
13 See Document 221.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
—Provided the Romanians properly implement the current cultural
agreement, expand ICA exchanges with Romania using funds repro-
grammed from the Soviet Union.
POLAND
Poland has been modestly helpful on the hostage issue through
private demarches to the Iranians and public statements on the primacy
of diplomatic immunity and inviolability. On Afghanistan, its apparent
efforts to get by with the minimum acceptable to the Soviet Union
were overshadowed by its defense of Soviet action in the General
Assembly debate.
Consistent with Poland’s exhibition of some restraint on Iran and
with our general policy objectives in Eastern Europe, we should, over
the near term, give consideration to the following steps with Poland:
—Proceed with the next round of CSCE discussions tentatively
scheduled for Washington in March.
—Invite higher-level participation in the U.S.-Polish Roundtable, also
planned for Washington in April, perhaps making explicit our desire
for a Frelek visit.
—Propose a visit to Poland and another Eastern European country
by DOD’s National Defense University.
—Propose a visit to Poland and another Eastern European country
by the White House Fellows, whose trip to the Soviet Union has just
been cancelled.
—Should further P.L. 480 funds become available, consider includ-
ing Poland in the program. [N.B. This will require a country-specific
Presidential Decision.]
—Ensure continuation of U.S.-Polish S&T exchanges by seeking new
Congressionally-authorized funding for FY–1982.
—Expand modestly ICA exchanges with Poland using funds repro-
grammed from the Soviet Union.
—Increase Poland’s fishing allocation by using quotas previously
reserved for the Soviet Union.
—Depending upon the reaction of the Western Europeans we are
consulting with, encourage Poland to join the IMF/IBRD. [N.B. This
requires further discussion within the government and consultation
with allies.]
—Encourage private U.S.-Polish cooperation in health, particularly
the Project Hope involvement in the Lodz Hospital project.
HUNGARY
Hungary has coupled expressions of understanding for Iran’s
alleged historical grievances against the U.S. with lower-key denunci-

Eastern Europe Region
ations of the holding of diplomatic hostages as a violation of interna-
tional law.
After initially reacting to the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan
with some restraint, the Hungarians have joined the chorus of those
supporting it.
Depending upon the evolution of the Hungarian position, we
should consider the following steps:
—If and when the Hungarians are able to do so, reschedule the
visit of the Hungarian Parliamentary delegation headed by Parliament
President Apro.
—Utilize reprogrammed funds from exchanges with the USSR to
expand exchanges modestly with particular emphasis on academic and
cultural exchanges.
—Go ahead with the CSCE Consultations slated for this spring.
—Propose a visit to Hungary and another Eastern European coun-
try of a National Defense University group.
—Signal our continued receptivity to high-level visits (below Kadar)
and consider sending a senior official(s) to Hungary.
—Propose a visit to Hungary and another Eastern European coun-
try by the White House Fellows, whose trip to the USSR has just been
cancelled.
—Send a VIP to open the “American Now” exhibit provided that
the Hungarian position on Iran/Afghanistan does not get worse.
—Assure State and Commerce participation at the Assistant Secre-
tary level in the second annual governmental U.S.-Hungarian Joint Eco-
nomic Committee meeting in Washington this spring.
BULGARIA
The Bulgarians were among the least forthcoming of the Eastern
Europeans on the question of the hostages in Tehran and the treatment
of the issue in the media has been slanted and objectionable. The
Bulgarian Government and media jumped on the Soviet Afghan band-
wagon early and have faithfully defended the Soviet actions. At the
same time, the Bulgarians have continued to stress their interest in
improving bilateral relations.
With Bulgaria, we should
—Consider supporting initiatives by Bulgaria to join the GATT.
CZECHOSLOVAKIA
The Czechoslovak UN representative made some positive state-
ments in voting for the initial Security Council resolution on Iran.
Otherwise, the media treatment has been slanted and unsympathetic.
The statements of the Czechoslovak Government and media treatment

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
of the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan have been vigorously supportive
of the Soviets.
On January 24, the Czechoslovaks postponed the late February
visit of FRG Foreign Minister Genscher, citing the international situa-
tion created by the NATO TNF decision and by the “unconcealed
threats” contained in the President’s State of the Union speech.
—We should keep under active review the tabling of a new proposal on
a claims settlement with Czechoslovakia which would also result in the
return to Czechoslovakia of 18.4 million metric tons of Nazi-looted
gold. This would finally compensate the American claimants and also
open avenues to increase U.S. access to Czechoslovakia. (There are
indications that Czechoslovakia may want to resolve this issue quickly,
and the present price of gold could enable us to obtain a significantly
higher settlement. Because of recent repressive actions by the Czecho-
slovak Government in the area of human rights and their position on
Afghanistan, however, it is currently not possible for us to proceed on
this issue.)
GERMAN DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC
The GDR position on Iran has been one of non-demonstrative
support for the observance of international law while its media has
sympathized with anti-US sentiment in Iran and warned of US military
retaliation. Concerning Afghanistan, the GDR has praised the Soviet
invasion as necessary in light of CIA-backed counterrevolutionary
activity based in Pakistan. As a new member of the UN Security Coun-
cil, the GDR joined the Soviet Union in voting against the resolution
condemning the invasion of Afghanistan.
The GDR’s position on Iran and Afghanistan should be balanced
against our stake in maintaining the progress made recently in impor-
tant areas of bilateral relations (e.g., humanitarian cases and US claims).
Depending on future GDR steps in these areas, it would seem appropri-
ate to continue our current deliberate pace toward handling GDR
issues, with final actions on all individual issues being reviewed in
light of the conditions at that time. We should
—Continue to send diplomatic and protocolary signals of displeas-
ure with GDR support for the Soviets.
—Proceed with CSCE consultations at a lower level.
—Fulfill our promise to permit a GDR Embassy branch commercial
office in New York City in return for a reciprocal option for a U.S. office.
—Depending upon the outcome of the export licensing policy
review, continue US participation in the Leipzig Fair in 1981.
—Proceed with the negotiation of a cultural agreement. [N.B. Some
IG members feel that negotiation of a cultural agreement with the GDR

Eastern Europe Region
at this time would conflict with our aim of signalling to the GDR our
displeasure over its support for the Soviets in Afghanistan. Others
however, feel that such an agreement is inherently in our interest and
should be pursued.]
We will continue to monitor carefully the public statements and
actions of the Eastern European countries concerning Afghanistan and
Iran, modulating our implementation of the steps suggested above in
accordance with these statements and actions.
37.
Memorandum From Paul Henze of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, April 17, 1980
SUBJECT
Dissidence in Eastern Europe and the USSR—Are We Doing Enough? (U)
Dissidence in this paper is used to mean not simply actions by
regime critics who achieve prominence, but the entire range of activity,
some obvious, some extremely unobtrusive, which generates pressures
for freedom of thought and expression, human rights and the advan-
tages of a pluralistic society. (U)
On the demonstrative and declarative level the record of the Carter
Administration is second to none in the past fifteen years. The President
has personally identified himself with prominent Soviet dissidents such
as Bukovsky, Shcharansky and Sakharov and during his visit to Poland
insisted on contact with both dissident and church figures. Other
Administration officials, most notably yourself, have repeatedly met,
endorsed and communicated with dissidents in the USSR and Eastern
Europe. The “spies for dissidents” exchange you arranged last year2
Brzezinski wrote at the top of the memorandum: “Good memo. Consult with MB [Mar-
shall Brement] and LB [Lincoln Bloomfield] on possible implementation? Which steps?
Which memos? ZB.”
the sentences of convicted Soviet spies Valdik Enger and Rudilf Chernyayev, who would
be departing the country. Powell also announced that the Soviet Union had released
five Soviet dissidents, including Alexander Ginzburg, all of whom were now in the
United States to be joined shortly by their immediate families. (Public Papers: Carter,
1979, Book II, p. 731)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
was one of the most politically astute moves the U.S. Government has
ever made on behalf of Soviet dissidents. The Administration’s human
rights policy has generated worldwide debate on human rights on
which dissidents in Communist societies have capitalized. Our partici-
pation in the Belgrade CSCE meetings under the vigorous leadership
of Arthur Goldberg underscored our commitment to principle and
highlighted Soviet efforts to avoid honoring commitments they
accepted in 1975. The Administration took early decisions which will
soon expand the power of VOA and RFE/RL. (U)
Other programs for communicating with Eastern Europe and the
USSR have been modestly expanded. (S)
Allocation of resources—both manpower and money—to pro-
grams encouraging dissidence and serving the needs of dissidence has
not been proportionate3 to the high level of attention the Administration
has given this field in statements and demonstrative actions. There
have been other problems in respect to performance and procedure. No
new operational instrumentalities have been created for implementing
human rights policies, sustaining research effort and channeling and
coordinating human rights initiatives on a self-propelled basis. (C)
Human rights have been overly politicized domestically as a result
of priority assigned by the State Department to more energetic pursuit
of human rights issues with non-Communist Latin American and Afri-
can countries than with Communist-ruled states. As a result human
rights is in danger of becoming a negative concept among conservatives
both in the U.S. and abroad. The subject needs to be brought into better
balance. (C)
Our most valuable instruments for communication with Eastern
Europe and the USSR are the big radios. New investment in transmitters
has not been matched by comparable investment in programming.
Though budgetary allocations for broadcasting have risen each year,
they have not been sufficient to offset inflationary increases in both
the U.S. and Europe and the declining value of the dollar. As a result
manpower rejuvenation and expansion of programming and research
support have continued to be postponed. The effect is evident in decline
in Radio Liberty listenership in the USSR. New investment for program-
ming improvement is urgently needed. This has been strikingly demon-
strated as we have taken up the question of broadcasting in Muslim
languages, where Radio Liberty’s current level of performance is only
a fraction of its potential. The same is true to a lesser extent for VOA. (C)
Book and publication programs for Eastern Europe and the USSR,
like the radios, provide the basic seed and fertilizer on which dissidence
3 Brzezinski highlighted this sentence in the margin.

Eastern Europe Region
is nourished. These programs were at a low ebb in 1977, at a far lower
level of real-dollar input than they had been ten years earlier. They
have received modest increases each of the past four years but are still,
at a total expenditure of less than $5 million per year, funded at levels
which do not enable them to exploit the new opportunities for penetrat-
ing the Communist world with ideas and information which are con-
stantly developing.4 Samizdat and tamizdat available for republishing
and distribution into Eastern Europe and the USSR are becoming avail-
able at a much faster rate than they are able to take advantage of
because of limitations of funds and manpower. (S)
Realization of the importance of Islam, national self-assertion
among the Muslim peoples of the USSR (as well as Christian peoples
such as the Balts, Ukrainians and Georgians) and the ferment and
feedback generated by events in Iran and the Soviet invasion of Afghan-
istan, (inter alia the resultant suppression of dissidents of which the
Sakharov exile is only the most flagrant example) are developments
which have highlighted new opportunities. Existing resources are inad-
equate to meet these opportunities. Existing manpower working on
these subjects is insufficient to do all the research and operational
planning that is required. (C)
RECOMMENDATIONS:
Programs for exploiting dissidence in Eastern Europe and the USSR
(and perhaps Cuba as well?) are, comparatively, in terms of the continu-
ing effect they generate within Communist societies, the most cost-
effective activity the U.S. Government undertakes. (U)
• While maintaining and refining its verbal commitment and demonstra-
tive public actions in behalf of dissidents and human rights in these countries,
the Administration should urgently consider immediate increases in
resources allocated to these activities. At a minimum they merit classifi-
cation as essential national security operations subject to real annual
The creation of one or more semi-autonomous institutions for sus-
tained implementation of human rights goals, with perhaps a combi-
nation of governmental and private funding, should be urgently
studied. (C)
• Expansion and refinement of radio programming by all instrumental-
ities available—VOA, RFE/RL—should be undertaken at a steady
4 Brzezinski highlighted the two sentences above in the margin.
5 Brzezinski wrote “reprogramming of books” in the margin.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
Plans should be made for future expansion of radio transmitters
to counter continued Soviet increases in transmitter power and efforts
to jam our transmissions. The long lead-time required for building
transmitters makes this essential. (C)
• Expansion of publication and distribution operations should also be
undertaken. Even modest increments of funds enable existing publica-
tion and distribution projects to perform at a much higher level of
efficiency. E.g., publishing 6,000 rather than 3,000 copies of a Ukrainian
dissident book costs much less than the initial cost of the original
• A tape-cassette distribution program should be developed to aug-
ment existing book and magazine programs; there is increasing evi-
dence that cassettes are popular and effective in the Communist
Substantively, areas and peoples who are poorly served by
current or even planned publication and distribution programs include:
—The Baltic States, especially the Lithuanians.
—The Ukrainians.
—The Caucasus, including the Georgians, Armenians and Muslim
peoples. (C)
Religion, not only Islam, should be given higher priority for
planning new operations. E.g., the potential of persistent Orthodox
tradition in the Ukraine and among Russians as a focal point for anti-
Communist nationalism (or nationalism that regards Communism as
irrelevant) needs to be examined. (C)
38.
Editorial Note
The Polish economic situation grew dire over the course of 1980.
On July 1, the Polish regime raised food prices nationwide, sparking
a series of strikes that quickly swept the country and forced the Polish
Government into crisis mode. The Embassy in Warsaw reported on
July 31 that “the labor unrest which has now persisted in Poland
for more than four weeks—strikes, stoppages, and slow-downs—may
already have cost the Polish Government as much as 50 billion Zlotys
($1.7 billion) in yearly pay increases in addition to a three to four
percent increase in domestic inflation.” Ad hoc committees, the
Embassy reported, “have been formed in many individual plants and
have bargained with management and governmental representatives,

Eastern Europe Region
pressing worker demands,” further discrediting government-sanc-
tioned labor unions. The Polish regime’s policy toward the emerging
groups, the Embassy wrote, “is still being formulated—painfully. The
government must, of course, consider that from the Soviet viewpoint,
such organizations are not only dangerous but virtually intolerable.”
tral Foreign Policy File, D800366–0451)
By mid-August, the economic and political situation in Poland had
deteriorated further. On August 12 the Embassy reported that, among
the effects of the ongoing labor unrest were “a review of what the role
of the trade unions should be; a drop in [First Secretary of the Polish
United Worker’s Party Edward] Gierek’s stature; increasing resort by
workers to job actions to defend their standard of living thereby causing
pressures to mount within the Party for a tougher policy toward the
working class; and emerging differences of opinion among the leader-
ship.” (Telegram 7960 from Warsaw, August 12; National Archives,
and Szczecin began on August 14 and 18, respectively. The workers
formed strike committees and issued lists of demands, including, for
the first time, the demand that workers be allowed to form trade unions
independent of government control. By August 24, Gierek tried to
appease protestors by firing several high-ranking members of the gov-
ernment and Party apparatus, including Polish Prime Minster Edward
Babiuch and Party ideologue Jerzy Lukazewicz. The Embassy reported
on August 24: “These personnel changes are the most significant and
sudden since 1970.” Although Gierek survived, his prestige suffered,
the Embassy reported. Concerning the strike committees in Gdansk
and Szczecin, the Embassy concluded: “Their solidarity seems too
strong just now to be affected by Party promises of free elections of
trade union representatives on the shop floor. We anticipate they will
have further tough negotiations with the Jagielski commission but
believe that they will find the commission more flexible than before.”
Central Foreign Policy File, D800404–0720)
Concerns about developments in Poland prompted the White
House to send a message to British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher,
French President Valéry Giscard d’Estaing, West German Chancellor
Helmut Schmidt, and other close allies on August 27. In his message
to Thatcher, sent directly from the White House to the Cabinet Office,
Carter wrote: “what is going on in Poland could precipitate far-reaching
consequences for East-West relations, and even for the future of the
Soviet Bloc itself.” “The best outcome,” Carter continued, “would
involve accommodation between the authorities and the Polish people,
without violence. Such an accommodation could well transform the

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
character of the Polish system.” Noting that Secretary of State Edmund
Muskie had met with his French and West German counterparts to
discuss Poland, Carter suggested that “it is extremely important for us
to keep in touch as the situation in Poland develops.” (Telegram
WH0642 to Thatcher, August 27; Carter Library, Brzezinski Donated
8/80) In a similar message sent to Pope John Paul II, the President
thanked the Vatican for “the wise approach which you and the hier-
archy of the church in Poland have been taking toward recent events.”
tral Foreign Policy File, P870047–0341)
Ambassador to Poland William Schaufele wrote on August 29:
“Every day this week I have toyed with making an up-to-date assess-
ment of the Polish situation but have delayed as new developments
pile up and send me back to the drawing board.” Noting that there
had been no violence associated with the strikes, Schaufele wrote: “If
the striking workers can maintain this discipline, the source of any
violence would have to be a decision by the government physically to
force them back to work or to remove them from the factories, ship-
yards, and other work places. And that would have grave implications
for the future. It is still our view that some of the militia would follow
instructions to use force but it is highly doubtful that the army would.
And the magnitude of the strike movement would stretch militia man-
power very thin.” (Telegram 8625 from Warsaw, August 29; National
On August 31, First Deputy Prime Minister of Poland Mieczyslaw
Jagielski and Solidarity leader Lech Walesa signed an agreement at
Gdansk guaranteeing, among other things, the right of Polish workers
to form independent trade unions and to conduct strikes. The Embassy
in Warsaw reported the signing on September 1, and concluded that,
while “the overall trend in Poland today seems to be back to work,”
the next period “requires the same prudence and responsibility. Both
the party and the new labor organizations will be jockeying for power,
and the inevitable friction that will result will demand of both sides
as much forbearance as they have shown to date.” (Telegram 8667 from
Warsaw, September 1; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
File, D800416–1014) Documentation on Poland is scheduled for publica-

Eastern Europe Region
39.
Memorandum From William Odom of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, September 3, 1980
SUBJECT
East-West Relations: A Formula for U.S. Policy in 1981 and Beyond
I want to offer some perspectives on the current state of East-West
relations and an integrating formula for putting both the resources and
a clear sense of strategic direction into our policies toward the Soviet
Union in the next four years. You will recognize much of the analysis,
but I hope the framework is helpful for tying rhetoric to actions and
programs in a comprehensive fashion. The inspiration for this memo
comes in part from Sam Huntington’s recent paper on U.S.-Soviet
relations2 which he wrote for Hedley Donovan, but it also stems from
my own efforts in strategic doctrinal changes, the Persian Gulf Security
Framework, and East-West technology transfers. We have accom-
plished a great deal over the past three years, and I would like to
maintain the momentum and include additional areas and programs.
The East-West Balance
In early 1977 you told Sam and me to “tell us how we are doing
in the world vis-a-vis the Soviets.” PRM–10 Comprehensive Net
Assessment3 was the reply. It treated military and non-military categor-
ies as well as all major regions of U.S.-Soviet competition.
1. The military balance was judged as “essential equivalence” and
the trends as adverse. That judgment looks sound in retrospect.
2. In the non-military categories of technology, economics, diplo-
macy, and political institutions, the U.S. was ahead although the critical
military-related technology gap was closing in several areas. In retro-
spect this judgment has been vindicated.
3. In the major regions outside Europe, Soviet prospects were
judged best in Africa and the Persian Gulf region. The Caribbean was
cited but without alarm. In retrospect, the record is mixed in Africa;
memorandum to Carter who wrote “Very interesting. J” at the top of the first page.
2 Not further identified.
3 Carter signed PRM–10, calling for a “Comprehensive Net Assessment and Military
Force Posture Review” on February 18, 1977. (Carter Library, National Security Council,
Institutional Files, Box 3, Unclassified/Declassified PRM and PD/NSC Documents)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
Iran as a crisis point was predicted; we were too optimistic about the
Caribbean; and Southeast Asia has been more volatile than anticipated.
In East Asia, our normalization with the PRC faces the USSR for the
first time ever with a China-Japan-U.S. tie of good relations.
4. In Europe, PRM–10 emphasized the certainty of political uncer-
tainty in both Eastern and Western Europe. That judgment remains
valid. The emergence of a more traditional German Ostpolitik, exploited
by Moscow in the traditional manner, signals growing difficulties in
West-West relations, i.e., within the Alliance. The Soviet invasion of
Afghanistan has given unambiguous evidence of the strategic interac-
tion between the Persian Gulf region and European-Soviet relations:
Soviet power projection that affects the oil states of the Persian Gulf
tends to reinforce the accommodationist politicizing forces in Western
Europe and thereby exacerbates U.S.-European relations vis-a-vis Mos-
cow and the Persian Gulf.
The Transition from Era I to Era II in East-West Relations
Critics within the U.S. and abroad have complained that the U.S.
has not pursued a steady or consistent course in U.S.-Soviet affairs.
The President, in particular, is believed by many to be responsible for
this. It is, in their view, all his fault.
To some extent, the apparent inconsistency is real. Soviet power
projection has been used more extensively in the last few years than
even informed policy and intelligence circles believed it would be.
“Changing” U.S. policy, therefore, has been “catching up” U.S. policy.
Consistent policy outputs are impossible when the inputs differ sub-
stantially from those anticipated.
To a larger extent the inconsistency is only apparent. It looks that
way because the foreign policy and press elites themselves are split
on fundamental assumptions about U.S. foreign policy. They are awak-
ening to and becoming disturbed by the transition from the first era
in East-West relations—1945 to the mid-1970s (U.S. dominance and
Pax Americana)—to the second era—the 1980s and 1990s (the nature
of which is still being defined, as Soviet military power makes itself
felt). But they are reacting to this awakening in quite different ways.
At least three fissures divide foreign policy and media elite views, and
perhaps even the broader public, as they assess the incipient realities
of Era II.
First, there are fundamental differences over the political utility of
military force. At the strategic nuclear level, some believe “assured
destruction” is enough. Others believe force balances and capabilities
make a political and diplomatic difference. At the conventional level,
some argue that our Vietnam experience shows that conventional mili-
tary power is greatly overrated. Others say that Vietnam proves the

Eastern Europe Region
importance of using conventional military power effectively, of not
squandering it where our interests are small.
The second fissure is East-West versus North-South primacy, between
those who view East-West relations as still the cornerstone of U.S.
foreign policy and those who believe that North-South relations rival
if not exceed East-West relations for the cornerstone role.
The third fissure concerns economics—the growing incongruities
between economic power on the one hand (Europe, Japan, and Saudi Arabia)
and military security responsibilities on the other hand (the U.S. carries
them all). It is only vaguely recognized, but it has enormous potential to
evoke an “isolationist—internationalist” dichotomy in security policy
prescriptions.
These fissures prevent a foreign policy consensus on East-West
relations and mean that in the 1970s, and perhaps into the 1980s, no
U.S. policy toward the USSR can have broad and constant support.
The domestic need to accommodate both sides of each fissure, particu-
larly in Congress for budgets, inevitably creates the impression, if not
the reality, of a wavering U.S. policy toward the Soviet Union and our
allies. Thus, blaming the President is far from an adequate explanation.
The primary task for U.S. foreign and defense policy in the early
1980s, therefore, is to complete the transition to Era II peacefully and
to give that era a definition and direction appropriate to changed
realities. Success will depend in part on closing the three fissures, and
a compelling formula articulated by the President will help close these.
Only their closure will provide the liberal consensus necessary for a
sustained realistic policy.
A U.S. Policy for Era II
Era II may or may not be dominated by the U.S. A return to the
Cold War is not possible because regaining the military preponderance
of that time is not feasible. Were it feasible, a Cold War balance would
be the best choice because it was a period relatively secure from general
war. A return to detente of the early 1970s is equally infeasible. The
Soviets would demand higher terms and be no less aggressive in
projecting power into the disputed regions. Even if the Soviet leaders
personally desired a relaxation, the centrifugal forces within the USSR,
in the Warsaw Pact, and in client states elsewhere would make it too
risky. They are trapped in their own expansive dynamic which limits
fundamental choices.
Neither the containment policy nor the detente policy alone is
adequate to deal effectively with the new level of Soviet power. A
more comprehensive approach is essential. The U.S. must neither rely
largely on military power nor passively “contain” Soviet power. The
U.S. must engage the USSR competitively.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
Huntington defined four elements of a policy toward the USSR on
which “competitive engagement” can be built.
a. Maintenance of military deterrence.
b. Containment of Soviet expansion where deterrence fails.
c. Offers of politically conditioned economic benefits.
d. Reduction of Soviet influence over client states, bloc states, and
minority nationalities in the USSR.
A number of things have been accomplished over the past three years
to provide the programs and policies for “competitive engagement”
over the next four years. When they are specifically related to the four
elements of the policy, a clear view of how to proceed in East-West
relations begins to emerge. That follows for each element.
a. Maintenance of military deterrence through military pre-eminence.
58, and 594 provide the direction our military programs must take to
maintain deterrence in the 1980s. The gap between our political objec-
tives and our military capabilities must be reduced. This can be accom-
plished through simultaneous improvements in our force posture and
meaningful arms control agreements.
—Force Improvements. We must address our military deficiencies
in a three-pronged attack which includes:
—The Budget. Not only must the budget be increased, but Defense,
FEMA, and the DCI must let the strategic PDs guide their program
choices. To date, they have yielded little to the new doctrine.
—Organization. All three agencies must be reorganized to improve
“factor productivity,” with particular emphasis on the Pentagon. The
President tried to reorganize DoD once, but the effort failed. He suc-
ceeded with FEMA. He must succeed in the next term with DoD.
—Manpower. We must also solve the military manpower problem.
That probably means a return to the military draft.
4 Presidential Directive (PD) 41, “U.S. Civil Defense Policy” was signed by Carter
on September 29, 1978, and directed that Civil Defense capabilities be used to enhance
deterrence and stability in conjunction with strategic offensive and strategic defensive
directed that any new proposal or modification in arms control negotiation posture be
tested against several criteria including whether it contributed to achieving defense and
force posture goals. PD–53, “National Security Telecommunications Policy,” was signed
November 15, 1979, and established policies for national telecommunication during and
and directed that mobilization scenarios be coordinated among interested Federal agen-
Weapons Employment Policy,” was signed July 25, 1980. It established that the most
fundamental objective of U.S. strategic policy was nuclear deterrence. U.S. strategic
nuclear forces were required to deter nuclear attacks not just on the homeland, but also
on forward bases, allies, and friends, and contribute to the deterrence of non-nuclear
attacks. (Ibid.)

Eastern Europe Region
The objective of these measures may not be “military superiority”
but it should be “military pre-eminence” for the US and its allies, in
terms of both nuclear and conventional forces.
—Arms Control. Arms control, too, plays a part in the military
balance. Arms control, however, is headed for indefinite dormancy in
the 1980s unless it is tied symbiotically to our defense policy. PD–50
prescribed the process that can achieve that symbiosis. ACDA, State,
and even ISA at Defense have failed to see this merit in the directive. Yet
it is precisely arms control that is at risk without the PD–50 approach.
SALT I and II were developed to support our assured destruction
defense policy of the 1960s. In the 1970s, that policy became inadequate.
ACDA and State drifted into the position of seeing arms control as a
surrogate for a defense policy. Now we are hesitantly awakening to
the defense policy problem in Europe. We cannot move with confidence
into TNF and SALT III negotiations because we are in transition with
our defense policy. That is not the only defense policy problem for
arms control. ASAT negotiations move on although we have not the
slightest idea of our force goals for space. No military service has
responsibility for them. The same is true for CTB. We have not devel-
oped our defense requirements for nuclear weapons development and
production of nuclear materials. Yet we are on a CTB track that enjoys
no interagency consensus.
Two major PD–50 tasks must be launched to extract us from this
disastrous course on which arms control now proceeds toward self-
destruction. First, an across-the-board assessment of all negotiations
vis-a-vis one another is essential. Second, a somewhat more narrow
review of the TNF/SALT III sector is needed to clarify what kind of
SALT III can assist our national security in an unambiguous and objec-
tive way. To do that, we must also review the whole of our strategy and
force structure for the defense of Europe. Both efforts should be complete
by next spring. To make these serious endeavors, the President will
have to reconfirm his commitment to the PD–50 process within the
agencies.
b. Containment of Soviet expansion where deterrence fails.
We must devote special attention to the three interrelated strategic
regions of Europe, East Asia, and the Persian Gulf. The Caribbean
region is also overdue for our security attention as is Southeast Asia.
We have major work to accomplish in each area, notwithstanding
much that has already been accomplished. NATO, as mentioned in
connection with PD–50, needs a reassessment of our strategy for its
defense. The Persian Gulf Security Framework effort must be kept on
track, a separate unified command being one of the first steps next
year. For the Caribbean we must begin a similar security framework

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
effort. In East Asia, the nature of military ties with China will need
further definition.
In addition to these regional activities, some key functional area
reviews must be accomplished:
—A successful policy of containment depends on capable conven-
tional force projection. We have a modest beginning in the RDF.
—Security Assistance policy needs significant revision, budgeting,
and perhaps changed legislation.
—Our intelligence capabilities in each region must be improved
and expanded with all the speed possible.
—Military training assistance and advisory policy needs repair.
The most difficult area in the 1980s may prove to be Europe, West-
West relations. Overcoming the lag between our own recovery from
the hopes of the early 1970s and Europe’s recovery from its present
illusion of divisible detente, will not occur without political trauma.
How to defend Europe effectively cannot be dodged as it has been for
three decades. And until that is decided, arms control within that
theater will be difficult to implement in a way that is not politically
and militarily injurious to the West. The LTDP was a modest beginning
which must be turned into a major revolution in the 1980s.
c. Offers of politically conditioned economic benefits to the East.
The Soviet Union and East Europe will continue to look to the
West as a source of reprieve from their economic plight. The West
must exploit that need with offers of economic assistance based on
rigorous and measurable political conditions.
With the new COCOM policies,5 we have begun to control more
effectively the strategic technology transfers. The next step is East-
West trade coordination. Credits and trade must be coordinated on an
alliance basis. Such a step logically follows from our COCOM policy.
Otherwise, the “alternative supplier” problem will continue to deny
us the political advantages of our greatest edge over the Soviets—
economic advantage. In the “process know-how” proposal to COCOM
we have already moved slightly toward trade coordination. That is
why Europe resists it. The diplomatic efforts now in progress to prevent
the FRG (Kloeckner) and France (Creusot-Loire) from taking our
ARMCO and ALCOA deals with the Soviet Union can be the seed
“the ‘no exceptions’ policy advocated by the U.S. for exports to the USSR would not
apply to Eastern Europe or the PRC.” Because the policy differentiated between countries
of the Soviet bloc, “there may be a greater temptation to divert exports within the Warsaw
Pact. COCOM participating governments, including the U.S., should carefully examine
the potential for diversion from Eastern Europe to the USSR.” (National Archives, RG

Eastern Europe Region
from which East-West trade coordination grows. If the Germans believe
that Soviet markets are critical for their machine exports, then we can
retaliate by denying them our import market. We have strong laws
that allow the President to force Europe to choose between the US as
a trading partner and the Soviet Bloc as a market. Once the allies are
whipped into line, we can dictate the political terms of East-West trade.
The Soviets deeply fear a Western united economic front. If we do
not present them with one in the 1980s, the incongruities between
security burdens and economic power in NATO will create a political
backlash in the US which will destroy public support for US troops in
Europe. The Mansfield Amendment was merely a hint of what can
come if the Europeans continue to get without paying for, because we
choose not to tax them.
To move from the rhetorical to the operational, we should use the
post-Afghanistan policy with our allies to lay the basis for East-West trade
coordination at the Economic Summit in Canada next summer. Once the
Soviets see an emerging united economic front, we will have important
opportunities for our economic diplomacy.
d. Reduction of Soviet influence over 1) client states, 2) bloc states, and
3) national minorities in the USSR.
It is time to reduce the spheres of Soviet influence, and the opportu-
nities are large. We have the beginnings of a policy for the three non-
Russian areas of Soviet influence.
—Client States. In Southwest Asia, in the Horn of Africa, in Southern
Africa (Angola), in Yemen, in the Caribbean, and in Southeast Asia we
can and should bring some reverses to the Soviet projection of power.
This will involve more vigorous support for anti-Soviet movements
afoot in all areas.
—Bloc States. We already have a policy for East Europe of encourag-
ing its autonomy vis-a-vis the USSR. We must help Poland consolidate
recent gains.
—Minorities in the USSR. We can do more on the nationality ques-
tion within the USSR. The human rights policy is, of course, already
a weapon in our arsenal. In an age of nationalism, there is nothing
permanent about Soviet “internationalism” and Soviet borders—some-
thing we can imply and encourage others to say explicitly.
A competitive approach to spheres and areas of Soviet influence
will make further Soviet projection of power more difficult. A passive
containment approach will permit Soviet consolidation of recent gains
and new efforts to expand further.
The Soviet Union, however militarily strong it is becoming, suffers
enormous centrifugal political forces. A shock could bring surprising
developments within the USSR, just as we have seen occurring in

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
Poland. The dissolution of the Soviet Empire is not a wholly fanciful
prediction for later in this century. US policy should sight on that
strategic goal for the longer run. When it comes, Era II will be at an
end, and we can anticipate Era III.
To sum up, through a strategy of “competitive engagement” the
President can, I believe, heal some of the fissures in our foreign policy
and media elite opinion on the three key assumptions for US military,
foreign, and economic policy. In a second term he will be freer to stand
above the day-to-day criticisms that have heretofore made a steady
course difficult to follow, particularly funding programs and pursuing
adequate legislation. He also has the enormous advantage of several
inchoate policy developments (as outlined above) that will allow him,
rather than the Soviets and our allies, to define the nature of Era II in
East-West relations. Basic steps have already been taken in each of the
four elements of “competitive engagement.” As policy slogans form
each element, the following are possibilities:
a. Maintenance of military deterrence.
US “military pre-eminence” is the essential basis for deterrence
and security. We shall acquire it and maintain it with our allies.
b. Containment of Soviet expansion where deterrence fails.
“Three interrelated security zones” are the basis for containing
Soviet power projection.
c. Offers of politically conditioned economic benefits.
“Reciprocally advantageous East-West trade” is our goal, but trade
is not compatible with threats to our security and foreign policy
interests.
d. Reduction of Soviet influence over client states, Bloc states, and non-
Russian minorities in the USSR.
“Resistance to Soviet internationalism” is encouraged wherever
states and nations find it oppressive and unwanted.

Eastern Europe Region
40.
Memorandum Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1
PA M80–10385C
Washington, September 5, 1980
LIKELY CONSEQUENCES IN EASTERN EUROPE
OF THE POLISH EVENTS
SUMMARY
Over the short to medium term (several months to a year) the Polish
regime’s granting of political concessions to striking workers will have a
greater effect on the regimes than on the populaces elsewhere in Eastern
Europe. The regimes will seek to head off any developments similar to those that
took place in Poland by using persuasion, assuagement, and—if necessary—
intimidation. If Moscow does not force wholesale retraction of the concessions
the regime in Warsaw has granted, workers elsewhere in Eastern Europe
eventually might raise demands similar to those the Poles have. If the Soviets
intervene to prevent the implementation of the concessions, other East Europe-
ans are unlikely to take the risk of emulating the Polish workers. (C)
Impact on the Regimes
[1 paragraph (11 lines) not declassified]
Over the short term, the regimes probably will be prepared to make
limited concessions—such as increasing the availability of consumer
goods, offering limited wage increases to certain workers, and perhaps
delaying price increases. At the same time they will increase the work-
load of party cadre who monitor and seek to direct public opinions
and will tighten security. They may also revamp the party-controlled
trade unions in an effort to head off criticisms and demands for change.
Nervous leaders, however, might over-react to any signs that people
are even considering imitating the Polish workers. Harsh political meas-
ures or the use of force could precipitate the very thing they wish to
avoid—labor unrest and other forms of popular demonstrations. (C)
East European leaders would become even more concerned if the
Polish regime proves unwilling or unable within the next several
months to retract some of its concessions. Internally the regimes would
most likely continue and intensify their efforts to persuade, assuage,
and intimidate. The economic costs of assuaging the populace might,
however, soon present a burden that the five countries would be unable
Europe of the Polish Events. Top Secret; [codeword not declassified]. Prepared in the Office
of Political Analysis and Office of Economic Research and coordinated with the National
Intelligence Officer for the USSR/Eastern Europe.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
and/or unwilling to bear. They would therefore begin—or in the case
of the East Germans step up—pressure on the Polish regime to curb
the workers. At the same time the East Europeans would probably ask
the USSR to provide them with greater economic assistance. The Soviets
might comply but would demand a political price—more tightening
of internal security and greater allegiance to the Soviet foreign policy
Impact on the Workers
We assume that the populaces in Eastern Europe have listened to
Western broadcasts and know of the outcome in Poland. We also
assume that many East Europeans were vicariously buoyed to learn
that a Communist regime was forced to make major concessions to
striking workers. It is unlikely, however, that any of the East European
populaces will react over the next several months by emulating the
Polish workers. In Romania, where there have been a number of minor
worker disturbances over this summer, significant numbers of workers
might go on strike, but they are likely to press for strictly economic
benefits—not for trade unions or other political concessions—and the
Ceausescu regime would be able to contain such strikes. (C)
Despite the victory of the Polish strikers, workers elsewhere in
Eastern Europe will be reluctant to challenge regimes that they per-
ceive—probably correctly—as more likely than the one in Poland to
reply with prompt and harsh repression. Even in the near term, how-
ever, the events in Poland may give rise to greater worker assertiveness
within the framework of established grievance procedures. In some
cases, moreover, circumstances could precipitate localized strikes. Such
strikes, however, are not likely to reach anything like Polish proportions
or to acquire a comparable political content. There is a less glaring
disparity between popular expectations and standards of living in the
rest of Eastern Europe than in Poland. The workers in the other coun-
tries also lack the leadership, self-discipline, and solidarity that their
Polish counterparts developed during years of strike experience. Nor
can they look for support from vocal and organized political dissidents
and an independent and politically influential church. (C)
Longer Term Implications
While the short term effects will be limited, over the next several
years the impact of the events of the past several weeks could result
in more substantial changes in Eastern Europe. Most regimes will be
forced in any case to make adjustments that will impede or rule out
attempts to boost economic efficiency. Efforts to provide more con-
sumer goods and hesitancy in implementing economically necessary
austerity policies would further exacerbate economic and financial
problems and delay for years the implementation of economic reform

Eastern Europe Region
measures that would inevitably be painful. A prolonged period of
economic stagnation—of level or slowly declining living standards—
seems in prospect, as all the economies of Eastern Europe face auster-
ity imposed by energy problems, demographic developments, and
the requirement of improving external hard currency financial posi-
Politically, the deteriorating economic situation could lead to dis-
putes within the leadership and the populaces could gain the impres-
sion that the regimes are not united and are indecisive. This perception
might tempt workers and political dissidents to become more assertive
and perhaps to cooperate with one another. Under such conditions,
the victory of the Polish workers could become an example other East
European work forces might seek to emulate. They would still be taking
a great risk, however, for they would have less reason to believe that
their regimes would necessarily follow the Gierek regime’s example
or that Moscow would tolerate another “Polish Summer.”2 (C)
2 See Document 38.
41.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassies in
All NATO Capitals1
250846. Subject: Poland and Eastern Europe: Analysis and Policy
Implications. Ref: State 238732.2
1. (C-entire text)
2. In an effort to analyze the likely effect on the USSR and Eastern
Europe of the developments in Poland and to evaluate their implica-
tions for U.S. policy, we circulated our initial assessment (reftel) to our
posts in Moscow and Eastern Europe for their initial thoughts and
Confidential; Priority. Drafted by Gilmore; cleared by Bridges, Parris, and Barry;
approved by Ridgway. Sent for information Priority to Belgrade, East Berlin, Bucharest,
Budapest, Moscow, Prague, Sofia, Warsaw, Helsinki, Madrid, Stockholm, and Vienna.
draft of the paper and requested comments on the analytical section as well as policy
recommendations for each individual Eastern European country. (National Archives,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
comments. This message represents a refinement of our assessment in
light of the responses from the field. We have cast paras 3–6 of this
message in the form of talking points which the action addressees may
share with host governments on a confidential basis. Action addressees
may also draw on the substance of paras 7–93 which discuss U.S. policy
in light of the recent events in Poland.
3. The present situation in Poland:
—Events in Poland have not yet run their course and the question
of whether the workers are ultimately successful in achieving a major
liberalization of Polish society will have a significant bearing on the
impact of these events on other Eastern European countries.
—Although Polish workers have already won some signal victories,
e.g., securing agreement in principle to an independent trade union
structure, acknowledgement of the right to strike, access by the church
to the media, and apparently some relaxation in censorship, the new
Polish leadership seems certain to try over time to pare back some of
these concessions. Nevertheless, in the short run, the situation in Poland
seems likely to stabilize and the gains of the workers seem likely to
be preserved.
4. Impact of Polish developments on Eastern Europe:
—The unique characteristics of the internal situation in Poland
reduce the chances of any immediate, direct spillover of Polish develop-
ments into other parts of Eastern Europe—let alone the USSR.
—At least some of the other Eastern European Governments are
likely to heighten the degree of vigilance toward dissidents and be
more alert to the possibility of discontent among workers. At the same
time, they are likely to pay more attention to agricultural performance
and supplies of foodstuffs and consumer goods.
—Several Eastern European Governments are likely to pay
increased attention to the possibility of structural economic reforms—
perhaps along Hungarian lines—as a way of dealing with worsening
economic problems.
—Over the longer term, developments in Poland are likely to have
a significant impact. The workers’ gains, especially if they are to some
degree consolidated and institutionalized, will serve as an example of
the kinds of evolutionary change which may some day be possible
elsewhere in the area.
5. Reaction from Moscow:
“draw from substance of para 7.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
File, D800453–1198)

Eastern Europe Region
—Poland’s reforms, if implemented, could threaten the party’s
monopoly on political power, and Moscow is concerned that elements
in other Eastern European countries might emulate Poland. Therefore,
the Soviets are likely to press the Poles to roll back—to the degree
possible—the concessions made to workers on the right to form inde-
pendent trade unions and the right to strike.
—While the Soviets seem certain to heighten their efforts on ideo-
logical vigilance, they are unlikely, at least for the present, to pressure
the Poles or the other Eastern European countries to curtail their eco-
nomic ties with the West.
—The Soviets are able and ready to provide Poland with some
economic assistance, as the recently announced agreements indicate.
Soviet hard currency balances are up, and so long as Polish develop-
ments remain within bounds acceptable to Moscow, the Soviets are
likely to provide carefully measured assistance. It is unclear at this
point how far Soviet leaders will find it possible or desirable to go.
—The Soviets also seem prepared to tolerate a degree of economic
experimentation, perhaps along the lines of Hungary’s new economic
mechanism, although they will caution against reforms which affect
the political structure of the state.
—Polish events point up particularly clearly the increasing difficul-
ties of the Soviet Union in resolving the problems in its economic and
political relationships with Eastern European countries.
—Domestically, the Soviets have taken steps such as the jamming
of VOA, BBC and Deutsche Welle to insulate their population from
information on developments in Poland.4 Although there are certain
parallels between Soviet and Polish economic problems, we see little
prospect of Soviet workers raising demands for fundamental reform
of the Soviet system.
6. Impact of Polish events on Europe as a whole:
—Detente and CSCE. In view of the low key posture of Western
European Governments with regard to the Polish crisis and Soviet
hopes of preserving the structure of detente in Europe, it seems unlikely
that the Polish developments will lead to a more pugnacious Soviet
stance at Madrid.
—It would be shortsighted, however, to attribute the “successful”
outcome in Poland as evidence of Soviet restraint in Europe or as a
triumph of detente.
4 See Document 79.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
—The Soviets will be at great pains to avoid weakening the position
they gained in post-1945 Europe, and they will not exclude the use of
armed force as a means of preserving their “alliance” in extremis.
7. U.S. policy:
It is clear, based on our assessment of the Eastern European reaction
to events in Poland, that the principal implication for the United States
in the future is to continue our policy of differentiation. With each
Eastern European Government our policy actions must take into
account that government’s policies toward us; at the same time we
must tailor our policy initiatives to the peculiar situation found in each
of these countries. We should be alert to the needs of the Eastern
Europeans and prepared to respond to them rapidly and concretely,
and with appropriate subtlety, in view of the sensitivity of the USSR.
Christopher
42.
Editorial Note
The crisis in Poland reached a tipping point in December 1980. On
December 2, the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) issued an Alert
Memorandum noting that the Soviets were increasing preparations for
an invasion of Poland: “Recent military activities in and around Poland
are highly unusual for this time of year. We are aware of preparations
for an imminent unscheduled joint service exercise involving Soviet,
East German, Polish, and possibly Czechoslovak forces” which “could
also serve as cover for an intervention.” While cautioning that Soviet
preparations did not denote an imminent invasion, the Agency con-
cluded that intervention was increasingly likely. (Carter Library,
National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 65,
following day, President Jimmy Carter sent Soviet General Secretary
Leonid Brezhnev a Hot Line message assuring the Soviet leader that
the United States was not intent on taking advantage of the Polish
crisis to change the balance of power in Europe. The White House also
issued a public statement warning of “unprecedented building of Soviet
forces along the Polish border” and Soviet statements of “alleged ‘anti-
Socialist’ forces within Poland.” The White House warned: “We know
from postwar history that such allegations have sometimes preceded
military intervention.” They continued: “Foreign military intervention

Eastern Europe Region
in Poland would have most negative consequences for East-West
relations in general and U.S.-Soviet relations in particular.” (Public
On December 4, the CIA received an urgent message from a highly
valuable and well placed source in the Polish General Staff, Colonel
Ryszard Kuklinski. Kuklinski informed the CIA that the Soviets had
decided to invade Poland with 15 divisions, 2 Czechoslovak divisions,
and 1 East German division on December 8. (Benjamin Weiser, A Secret
Life, pages 219–221) Despite Kuklinski’s information, the final decision
on Soviet intervention had been delayed until after a special meeting
of the Political Consultative Committee (PCC) of the Warsaw Pact
scheduled to take place in Moscow on December 5. At the meeting,
Polish First Secretary Stanislaw Kania, informed the other Eastern Euro-
pean leaders that the Polish leadership had instituted a group working
on imposing martial law in Poland, arresting the leadership of Solidar-
ity, and creating an armed militia of party functionaries. While the
Warsaw Pact leaders cautioned Kania of the danger of having the
situation further deteriorate, it was agreed that the Polish leadership
should still attempt to resolve the situation on its own. (From Solidarity
to Martial Law, pages 141–161)
On December 7, the National Security Council met to discuss the
situation in Poland and U.S. reactions. President Carter approved the
text of cables to be sent to the United Kingdom, France, the Federal
Republic of Germany, and other U.S. allies, as well as the United
Nations Secretary General and NATO Secretary General. Following
the meeting, the White House issued a statement: “Preparations for
possible Soviet intervention in Poland appear to have been completed.
It is our hope that no such intervention will take place. The United
States Government reiterates its statement of December 3, regarding the
very adverse consequences for U.S.-Soviet relations of Soviet military
intervention in Poland.” (Public Papers: Carter, 1980–1981, Book III,
page 2785)
On December 8, Bureau of Intelligence and Research Director Ron-
ald I. Spiers briefed Western Ambassadors in Washington on the U.S.
assessment of the Polish situation. In telegram 326216 to multiple posts
December 9, the Department of State informed all NATO capitals that
Spiers told the Ambassadors that the Soviets had completed prep-
arations and military intervention could happen without further
notice. Spiers reported: “Military signs are sufficiently ominous that
whatever steps can be taken to affect Soviet decision making should be
taken now.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
By December 11, the Soviet leadership had decided to wait for a
Polish solution to the crisis. In a meeting of the Soviet Politburo, chief

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
Soviet ideologue and chairman of the special Soviet Politburo commis-
sion on the Polish events Mikhail Suslov reported on the December 5
PCC meeting: “Most importantly, the Polish comrades understand the
great danger that hangs over Poland, and they recognize the great
harm of the actions of the anti-socialist elements who represent a great
threat to the socialist gains of the Polish people.” Kania, concluded
Suslov, “noted that the Polish United Workers’ Party, the Polish people,
its healthy forces, its armed forces, the organs of State Security and
police, which support the PUWP, will be able to deal with and normal-
ize the situation by their own means.” Brezhnev’s speech at the meeting,
Suslov told the Politburo, “contained all the necessary instructions for
the PUWP and the Polish comrades.” (From Solidarity to Martial Law,
pages 167–168)
In his December 19 NSC Weekly Report to the President, Assistant
to the President for National Security Affairs Zbigniew Brzezinski
reported: “The same Soviet clandestine source who provided the report
detailing Soviet invasion plans now reports that the invasion has been
postponed for the ‘indefinite future.’ The principal reason for the post-
ponement, according to the sources, was the effectiveness of the West-
ern counter propaganda campaign which convinced the Kremlin the
West would retaliate ‘massively’ with political and economic sanc-
tions.” (Carter Library, Plains File, Subject File, Box 30, NSC Weekly
43.
Telegram From the Embassy in Poland to the Department of
State1
12334. Subject: Poland: Post-Intervention U.S. Policy.
1. (C-entire text.)
2. Summary: In considering the U.S. response to Russian/Warsaw
Pact intervention in Poland, the guiding principle should be to distin-
guish between the Russians and the EE’s. The former, not the latter,
Confidential; Immediate; Exdis. Sent for information to Belgrade, East Berlin, Bonn,
Bucharest, Budapest, London, Moscow, Paris, Prague, Sofia, Vienna, USMission West
Berlin, Munich, and USNATO.

Eastern Europe Region
should be made to bear the brunt of the negative consequences of
intervention, in continuation of our goal of dividing the East, not driv-
ing it together. The basic reality, arguing for differentiation, is that the
entire EE area is in a permanent, low-grade crisis in which Russian
interests and the interests of the client states tend to diverge. As regards
the Polish regime, our approach should be that it was forced against
its inclination and better judgement by the Russians to do their bidding.
The alternative to differentiation, a general anathema on Russians,
EE’s and Polish Party people of every stripe is the easier option, but
experience shows it will not carry very far before counter-pressures
develop. The West [as] a whole, and the U.S. in particular, will be faced
with tough decisions in the economic aid field in a post-intervention
situation. I would not rule out carefully conditioned offers of assistance,
or short-term food relief measures, as a way of looking—and being—
constructive, re-entering the Polish scene and retaining flexibility from
which to acquire marginal area of influence. End summary.
3. I know the Department has under consideration the question of
our response to Soviet intervention in Poland.2 This is a many faceted
issue. I submit some thoughts on how we might deal with the Polish
authorities and the other EE’s, in distinction to the Russians.
4. Much will depend on the circumstances, and several scenarios
can be envisaged. The Russians will, as in Czechoslovakia in 1968,
claim that they and other Warsaw Pact forces have responded to a
Polish invitation. They may actually be able to provide some substantia-
tion of the claim or, as in 1968, they may simply declare an invitation
as a fact and proceed from there.
5. The main consideration is that, whatever the Russian stage man-
agement turns out to be, it is they who are responsible. The others go
along, more or less willingly. We should be guided accordingly. The
Russians should be made to bear the negative consequences of interven-
tion, so far as the U.S. reaction goes. We should distinguish between
them and their Warsaw Pact allies to the extent possible. The objective
should continue to be, as in our post-Afghanistan policy, to seek to
divide, not to unite the Eastern group.
6. There are difficulties in this suggested approach. It would not
be easy, for example, to operate on the premise that the East German
and Czechoslovak regimes have been dragged into intervention in
Poland, in light of their anti-Polish actions and statements in the past
several weeks. Hungary and Romania have been fairly restrained by
comparison, and I judge Bulgaria too. In the event of intervention they
2 See Document 44.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
will all be subject to heavy Russian pressure to support the action, if
not actually participate in it. There may be shading of tone, but I suspect
they will be fine ones in the general chorus.
7. Nevertheless, it is important in our long term interests to proceed
on the assumption of distinction between the Russians and the others.
The reason, in my view, is that it is demonstrable that the whole Eastern
Europe empire is in a permanent, low grade crisis in which Russian
interests and those of its clients tend to diverge on many points. It is
a crisis the central feature of which is economic mismanagement. It is
not a crisis which is bound to drive people to the barricades, though
it will, I suspect, keep them in a constant state of disaffection. The
Polish trouble, even if it is liquidated, will on this view reappear at
some future point in other places in other forms—just as 1956 and 1968
were unable to exorcize the demon.
8. Our approach to the Polish authorities in a post-intervention
situation will be particularly important. Again, much will depend on
the actual circumstances. Perhaps there will be an invitation from some
Polish quarters for Warsaw Pact “fraternal assistance.” Perhaps Polish
security or military forces will act to put down worker resistance by
force. I suggest our basic approach should be that the Poles, specifically
the Polish Party, were forced into such actions against their better
judgement through massive Russian pressure and intimidation. Such
a line has a basis in fact. The Party, up to this point, has shown notable
readiness to try to find compromises with the new union movement.
Admittedly, it has had few options, but the fact remains that is has
not had recourse in the past months to massive repressive methods.
We would certainly not wish to endorse in any way Polish figures
sharply identified with intervention or repression, but rather put the
stress on “healthy forces” in the party which have tried to devise Polish
solutions for Polish problems.
9. I would not pretend that this suggested course is easy or likely
to produce quick results. The easier way in fact is to lump everyone
together, Russians, EE’s, Polish Party people of every stripe, in one
general anathema, draw the ideological battle lines sharply and settle
down to a long, cold winter in the trenches. The difficulty with this
course is that experience tells us it does not last long. Usually sooner
than later, counter-pressures develop. Allies will begin to get itchy
about selling large diameter steel pipe. Joint projects for Siberian devel-
opment will start dancing like sugar plum fairies. The Ostpolitiker will
start sighing for the German nation. Our farmers will want to sell their
grain again. And, on other levels, we will all gradually wend our way

Eastern Europe Region
back to the reality that we need the Russians pretty badly, chiefly in
arms control.
10. If that is where we are headed in the post-Polish intervention
period, be it in one, two or however many years, we should be sure
we do not make it tougher for the EE’s than we do for the Russians.
I and, I suspect, others who have been involved in US-Czechoslovak
affairs feel that we transferred some [of] our policy rage at the Russians
over 1968 to the injured party, Czechoslovakia. We should try to avoid
that policy pothole in a Polish 1980, or 1981.
11. I realize that history cannot be telescoped. We could not have
adopted the attitude to Kadar in 1956 that we did in 1966, or even
more in 1976. Polich [Poland] has to take its natural course, and it is
often inevitably slow. I would not go so far as to suggest that we
should be on the alert for Kadar equivalents in any Polish variation
on the Russian intervention theme, but we should be careful not to
paint ourselves too firmly into too many corners too quickly. Before
anyone yells “quisling,” it would be well to reflect on the irony that
Kadar, of all people, would be the last best hope left in EE of a mildly
progressive internal regime if the present Polish strivings collapse.
12. I have pointed to economic mismanagement as the root cause
of low-grade crisis through EE, and it is in the economic area that
we and others would face particularly sensitive decisions in a post-
intervention scene. That is, assuming that the Russians/EE’s do not
retreat into the bunker of strict autarky but continue to be interested,
as I tend to think they must be, in developing economic relations and
limited cooperation with the West.
13. It would not be easy for a USG, or other Western countries, to
extend economic assistance to a post-intervention Polish regime, yet
Poland in the aftermath of intervention would need economic assist-
ance even more desperately than it does now. We could adopt the
position that that is a Russian affair, and let it go at that, but I hardly
think that simply washing our hands of it will satisfy public opinion,
particularly American Polonia. I would not exclude our making care-
fully conditioned offers of assistance as a way of re-entering the Polish
situation and making our presence felt. This leaves it up to the other
side, Polish or Russian, to turn us down, and the onus would be on
them while we would look—and actually be—constructive.
14. Immediate food aid, as distinct from broader economic assist-
ance, would become particularly acute in a post-intervention situation.
I believe we would find ourselves under public pressure, on broad
humanitarian grounds, to try to help the Polish people in what would
doubtless be a time of distress. Although I have reservations about

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
short-term CCC aid under current conditions (Warsaw 11704)3, I doubt
that we would have any alternative but to grant some kind of food
assistance post-intervention, either bilaterally or through multilateral
programs and channels.
15. The guiding thought in all the above is simply, to repeat, we
should work to divide the East, not drive it together. It is not always
easy to translate that principle into practical action courses. But in
general it reduces itself, even—one might say especially—in highly
charged situations such as post-intervention Poland would be, to retain-
ing flexibility and continuing to seek marginal areas of influence.
Meehan
situation and Poland and addressed the Polish request for CCC credits: “Granting addi-
tional CCC assistance might be justifiable on humanitarian grounds, but I find it difficult
to produce a convincing foreign policy rationale—and the humanitarian case does not
demand immediate decision.” Meehan concluded that any short-term CCC credits
“would be marginal to the great mass of the problem” and suggested that a decision
on offering the credits be held in reserve. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
Policy File, D800554–0379)
44.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassies in
Bulgaria, Czecholslovakia, Yugoslavia, Poland, Hungary, and
the Soviet Union1
332554. For the Ambassador from Barry. Subject: US Policy Toward
Eastern Europe Following a Soviet Intervention in Poland.
1. (S-entire text.)
2. The following is a draft of a paper now being prepared to deal
with the question of our policy response in Eastern Europe to a Soviet
intervention in Poland. We need to get this upstairs by COB December
17 and would appreciate any substantive comments you have to make
in the meantime. Please restrict distribution to yourself and the DCM
Secret; Immediate; Stadis. Drafted and approved by Barry. No final version of the paper
quoted in this telegram was found.

Eastern Europe Region
and slug any replies Stadis—EUR only. Please do not refer to it in
other communications.
Begin text:
—It was easy to rationalize our decision last January not to impose
sanctions against the Warsaw Pact countries of Eastern Europe for the
Soviet invasion of Afghanistan.2 Furthermore, the policy of differentia-
tion which we enunciated at the time worked—the countries of Eastern
Europe clung eagerly to their relations with the US and Western Europe
despite public and private Soviet complaints that we were trying to
divide them from their allies. The policy which we have pursued over
several administrations has encouraged diversity and evolutionary
change in Eastern Europe. In fact, it has contributed to the independ-
ence in foreign policy which has created such problems for Moscow
in Romania respectively, and to the domestic pluralism in Poland and
the economic reform in Hungary which have already brought those
countries some way back toward Western models.
—We should not lose sight of the fact that the economic and politi-
cal forces which brought about the situation in Poland are also at work
in the rest of Eastern Europe. The very fact that the East Germans, for
example, are so afraid of Western influence and presence should point
us in the direction of getting more involved in Moscow’s back yard—
discreetly, but in concrete ways—rather than reducing our ties and
influence. Our objective should be to divide the East, not drive it
together by intentionally apportioning more blame to the raped than
the rapist, as we have been accused of doing with Czechoslovakia after
the 1968 invasion.
—Yet we should be under no illusion that it would be possible to
continue our policy without change in the wake of a Soviet-sponsored
Warsaw Pact intervention in Poland. In the first place, some of the
Warsaw Pact countries would no doubt participate in an intervention in
Poland, thus distinguishing this from the case of Afghanistan. Secondly,
both Soviet pressures and the grave deterioration in East-West relations
in the wake of a Polish intervention would create new divisions in
Europe and limit Eastern European freedom of action. Thirdly, public
opinion here and in Western Europe would demand some actions
against a Polish Government which suppressed the independent trade
unions by force or East European Governments which participated in
an intervention in Poland. US unions, for example, would no doubt
take matters in their own hands and refuse to handle Polish ships
and aircraft.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
—While we must consider an appropriate policy response concern-
ing Eastern Europe in advance and discuss it with our allies, we need
to be careful not to lock ourselves into a policy response which might
turn out to be incorrect in the event. We must recognize that interven-
tion in Poland is the doing of the Soviet Union clients. They will respond
with varying degrees of enthusiasm, with the GDR certainly and Czech-
oslovakia probably egging Moscow on, Bulgaria reticent, Hungary
obviously reluctant and Romania perhaps dissociating itself. While
some Eastern European military units may go into Poland, they will
probably only have a symbolic role to play as was the case in Czechoslo-
vakia in 1968. There is also the question of the general scenario under
which any intervention might take place and the strong possibility that
it will be under the guise of “Warsaw Pact maneuvers” or some kind
of invitation—perhaps genuine—from the Polish Government. Our
policy response in Eastern Europe will have to take all of these factors
into account.
—There is an important tactical point as well. Our allies are pre-
pared to agree that a strong policy response is required vis-a-vis the
Soviet Union. They are probably prepared even to sacrifice some impor-
tant economic interests to make such a policy response. However, they
will not be prepared to agree that the same or similar measures should
be automatically applied to Eastern Europe—for all the reasons above
plus others. The most serious objections would come from the FRG,
as Schmidt would certainly not be ready to sacrifice the future of inner-
German relations as part of a response to Soviet intervention in Poland.
The question of specific steps to be taken in Eastern Europe could
sidetrack the discussion of measures to be applied to the Soviet Union,
and over the longer term, a US effort to bring the Europeans along on
sanctions against Eastern Europe would run into considerable resist-
ance and play into the hands of Soviet efforts to divide the US from
its allies. We must, in this regard, keep well in mind the fact that the
Western Europeans have gone considerably farther than we in building
economic and political relations with Eastern Europe.
—A similar general consideration to be borne in mind is that of
reversibility. If the cause of sanctions against Eastern Europe is Soviet/
Warsaw Pact intervention in Poland, what would be the logical cause
of removing these sanctions? Withdrawal of Soviet troops from Poland?
A Polish Government “acceptable to the Polish people”? In other words,
whatever measures we impose will be with us for a long time unless
we want to run the risk of being perceived as inconsistent in our policy.
—These considerations argue for moving ahead slowly and cau-
tiously in planning our policy response in Eastern Europe. While we
should look at the range of political and economic steps open to us
and calculate their costs and benefits, we should not be “drawing up

Eastern Europe Region
lists” and seeking allied agreement to them. In our consultations with
others, we ought to confine ourselves to general observations along
the above lines rather than trying to get specific as we are on the Soviet
case. Our public posture in the event of a Warsaw Pact intervention
ought to be to place the blame squarely on the Soviets while acknowl-
edging that our attitude toward Eastern European participants cannot
help but be affected by the nature and enthusiasm of the support they
provide to Moscow in any actions taken against Poland.
General Considerations
—As a general rule of thumb, we believe that our policy response
toward Eastern European participants ought to concentrate on refusing
to do things in the political and economic area rather than imposing
sanctions or embargos which will be difficult to lift in the future.
—Obviously our political relations with Warsaw Pact participants
will worsen after an intervention and we will want to take steps—in
the UN, at Madrid, and in US and allied public statements—taking
them to task for their violation of Polish sovereignty while making it
clear that we hold the USSR—not the peoples or Governments of East-
ern Europe—to blame.
—It will be very much in our interest to measure our response in
terms of the amount of intervention; thus, a token participation by an
EE country would logically call for a lesser response than what we did
vis-a-vis Moscow.
—While not imposing a ban on high-level contacts with Eastern
Europe—which make Moscow uncomfortable—we will want to hold
back for several months.
—Yet we would want to continue and even expand where possible
less visible cultural exchanges and mutually beneficial scientific and
technical exchanges.
—We would not want to extend to Eastern Europe our policy of
terminating or suspending US-Soviet bilateral agreements. This would
mean keeping MFN in place for Poland, Hungary and Romania as well
as bilateral civil aviation and maritime agreements.
—However we would no longer be able to differentiate between
the USSR and the rest of the Warsaw Pact (except Romania) in the area
of technology transfer. Assuming Romanian opposition to intervention
in Poland, we would want to develop a really meaningful differentia-
tion in the US Government and in COCOM.
—We would not propose an embargo on grain sales to Eastern
Europe, as neither the Allies nor the American farmer would support
such a move. At the same time we would shift to a “cash-and-carry”
policy where appropriate to place maximum burden on the Soviet
economy to feed Eastern Europe. We would also continue to warn that

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
any diversion of US grain to the USSR or substitution of US grain for
domestic products shipped to the USSR would lead to extension of
the embargo.
—We would not suspend Export-Import Bank financing for Eastern
Europe. (In any event US and European private banks which make up
70pct of the debt exposure would drastically cut back on new loans
and we would encourage them to limit their activities to roll-over of
outstanding debt. Similarly, US business interest in large projects in
Eastern Europe would decline.)
—Against the background of the overall policy approach, there
follows a country-by-country discussion of policies toward each East-
ern European Government.
Poland
—Here we face the most serious dilemma. The Polish Government
is likely to become heavily involved in any intervention scenario, and
Kania or his successor will be pursuing a repressive policy. Yet neither
the US Government nor the US people—Polonia in particular—will
want to punish the Polish people for being invaded. Poland’s already
disastrous economy will decline still more precipitously in the face of
passive resistance by an angry populace. We want the Soviets to pick
up the bill, and we don’t want US grain to feed a Soviet army of
occupation. Yet the Poles will need food, and a number of Americans
will want to provide it.
—American labor will probably take matters into its own hands
if the past is any guide. Dock workers boycotted ships bound for Poland
during the August strikes, and they will do no less if Solidarity is
crushed and its leaders imprisoned. The US Government would hardly
want to argue against such action, or against similar boycotts of Polish
airliners. Yet we would recommend against an embargo on grain sales
which would be unpopular, superfluous and difficult to lift in the
future.
—CCC is another matter. Our very sizeable exposure in Poland
has been a political gesture, tied to our support for conciliatory Polish
policies toward the workers. On financial and economic grounds, we
would want to cut back our exposure. This would also force the Soviets
to supply hard currency for new grain purchases. This points to a
policy of no new CCC credits, but continued grain sales (assuming no
diversion to the USSR) and eventual lifting of a longshoreman’s boycott,
on a cash-and-carry basis.
—On other economic measures, we suggest a formal turn-down
of the Polish request for further concessional economic assistance. We
presume our allies would react similarly, and that this combined with
the shrinkage of private credit would force Poland to default and to

Eastern Europe Region
request rescheduling. We would insist on a multilateral approach and
tough financial and economic conditions designed to get the Soviets
to bear as much of the burden as possible.
—While supporting an end to any kind of economic assistance to
the Polish Government, many Americans will support private assist-
ance to the Polish people provided it can be monitored to insure against
diversion to the USSR. We should support Catholic Relief, CARE,
Project Hope and other private organizations ready to act as transmis-
sion belts for assistance. UN agencies probably would not get involved
because of the Soviet angle.
—In other areas we would suggest:
—Letting EXIM financing seek its natural level—which will be
very low given Poland’s financial problems.
—Ending any especially favorable treatment on fish allocations.
—Dropping any effort to fund cooperation in science and technol-
ogy, which would mean that the cooperative program would grind to
a halt for the present.3
Romania
—Romania is another special case. Ceausescu appears to have made
a genuine effort to head off Soviet intervention and he may not even
lend rhetorical support to any action. If he does not, our aim should
be to find new ways of supporting Romania—consonant with their
wishes—and providing incentives for continued foreign policy inde-
pendence in the fact of growing Soviet pressure. Some suggestions:
—Scheduling a high-level visit to Romania if the Romanians
want one.
—Supporting Romania’s bid to host the next CSCE review confer-
ence, if we can work out a way not to offend our Belgian allies who
have put forward Brussels as a site.
—Acting quickly on Romania’s request for a COCOM-controlled
aileron drive assembly for the fighter they are producing with
Yugoslavia.
—Establishing a meaningful differential in US export control regu-
lations and COCOM to permit prompt gray-area exceptions for
Romania.
—Approving some $100 million of Romania’s $450 million request
for CCC loan guarantees.
ments in the paper and expressed strong support for continuing a policy of differentiation
among Eastern European states. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
—Supporting Romania in the IMF/IBRD, particularly the power
station loan coming up this month.4
GDR
—The East Germans have clearly been urging intervention on Mos-
cow. While they may not be given much of a military role because of
the incendiary effect this would have in Poland, they will certainly join
in Soviet action in some fashion.
—The East Germans are the prime candidates for retaliatory mea-
sures. Yet we have very little going with them in the first place. And
the West Germans, who do, will not want to do anything for fear of
giving Moscow an excuse to squeeze Berlin and the inner-German
relationship.
—Aside from the general extension of a COCOM no-exceptions
policy to cover Eastern Europe, we believe that the most appropriate
response in dealing with the GDR would be:
—A marked cooling of political relations across-the-board.
—Refusal to discuss MFN or conclusion of a cultural agreement
for the foreseeable future.
—Encouragement of restriction of private credits to the GDR and
an active policy of discouraging US business from involvement in major
projects involving the GDR.5
Czechoslovakia
—Czechoslovakia will presumably be required to support actively
a Soviet intervention and may even play a military role larger than the
GDR. The Western Europeans will be less sensitive about steps taken
against Czechoslovakia than about those taken against the GDR. Our
own relations with Czechoslovakia are not good and there are few
areas where we could take meaningful action aside from our general
technology transfer policy.
—One area of importance is the claims/gold negotiation. We have
asked for a $105 million settlement and the Czechoslovaks have offered
less than half of that. In the wake of Soviet intervention the prospects
for a negotiated settlement would be very poor. Our response could
be to insist on a settlement at or near the US proposal and, if this is
not forthcoming, report to the Congress that no negotiated settlement
is in sight. This would lead to passage of legislation vesting the gold
4 Bucharest was not among the addressees, and no response from the Embassy in
Romania was found.
5 No response from the Embassy in East Berlin was found.

Eastern Europe Region
and investing it in interest-bearing securities which could be used to
pay off the US claimants.
—Other possible steps include:
—Refusal to discuss MFN.
—Refusal to discuss signature of the US-Czechoslovak Cultural
Agreement.
—Pressures on US firms not to engage in large projects with
Czechoslovakia.6
Bulgaria
—Bulgaria is likely to be a lukewarm supporter of Soviet action
in Poland. They would certainly lend their rhetorical support and
possibly even a small military unit but they would take refuge in the
thought that Poland is far away and Bulgarian interests not at stake.
—There are two specific steps we could take with Bulgaria to
express our displeasure.
—Refusal to pursue further the Bulgarian initiative to discuss MFN.
—Indefinite postponing of the signing of the US-Bulgarian Mari-
time Agreement.7
Hungary
—Hungary is likely to be the least enthusiastic supporter of Soviet
action in Poland next to Romania. They have evidently been pressured
by the Soviets, East Germans and Czechoslovaks to take a more outspo-
ken stand on Poland and would certainly go along formally with any
kind of Warsaw Pact action. Yet their heart would certainly not be in
it and they would fear greatly for Hungary’s increasingly beneficial
image as a country adhering only formalistically, where possible, to
the alliance with Moscow. We have made more progress in our relations
with Hungary over the last years than with any other EE country and
it would be contrary to our interests to penalize an obviously reluctant
partner in a Warsaw Pact undertaking by taking steps we will not be
able to reverse.
with the general thrust of the paper, but stressed that the United States should make a
best effort to finalize negotiations on the Gold/Claims agreement. (National Archives,
paper did not address U.S. policy in case of an internal crackdown by the Polish regime.
Perry recommended that the Department not “‘set’ policy responses so that possible
nuances of the situation can be ignored.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
Policy File, D800599–0886)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
—Aside from a political cooling, the only concrete step we suggest
taking toward Hungary is to cancel a proposed visit by a DOE delega-
tion set for early next year.8
Yugoslavia
—We should move immediately to reassure the Yugoslav leader-
ship (and to warn Moscow) that our policy of support for Yugoslavia
remains firm and steady. Political, and perhaps military, consultations
will help to determine Yugoslav desires and to demonstrate our resolve
to friend and foe alike.
—Yugoslavia has already expressed its opposition to Soviet inter-
vention in Poland and would be expected to follow through after a
Soviet move by attempting to mobilize nonaligned and Third World
sentiment against the intervention. While at present there is no evidence
pointing toward a direct Soviet/Pact military threat against Yugoslavia,
the Yugoslav leadership would be apprehensive about Soviet intentions
and would welcome and perhaps seek out expressions of U.S. political
and military support. At the same time the leadership would be
extremely sensitive to any signals which might provoke Moscow. While
we need not subordinate our interests to those of the Yugoslavs, we
should attempt to consult with the GOY prior to announcing those
steps we have decided to take with regard to Yugoslavia.
Those steps would include:
—Publicly reiterating U.S. policy of support for Yugoslavia’s inde-
pendence, territorial integrity and unity.
—Suggesting immediate political, and if the situation warrants,
military consultations to discuss further steps.
—Consulting with key allies to encourage similar actions.
—Taking steps to hasten delivery of pipeline military items, acceler-
ating projected military training programs, and reviewing previously
denied high technology weapons requests.
—Considering reprogramming to meet possible GOY requests for
FMS credits.
—Intensifying measures against U.S. based anti-GOY terrorism.
—Being prepared to offer currency swap arrangement to bolster
Yugoslav reserves if commercial bank lending dries up in the aftermath
of Soviet invasion;
the premises of the paper and stressed that the policy of differentiation had served
well U.S. policy in the past in Hungary and had “encouraged Hungary’s diversity and
evolutionary change within the bloc.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
File, D800599–1057)

Eastern Europe Region
—Making a number of small but symbolic gestures in areas such
as civil aviation, trade preferences (GSP), and eligibility for aid
procurement.
—Renewing invitations for postponed visits by high-level Yugo-
slav nuclear power delegation and Foreign Trade Secretary Rotar.9
Muskie
ment had taken into account its previous recommendations (see Document 300) and
that it had nothing new to add to its previous cable. (National Archives, RG 59, Central
Foreign Policy File, D800599–1100)

Radio Free Europe, Radio Liberty, and
Voice of America
45.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, January 31, 1977
SUBJECT
Report to Congress on the United States International Broadcasting Program
The Fiscal Year 1977 Foreign Relations Authorization Act requires
the submission to Congress not later than January 31, 1977, of a Presiden-
tial report on the United States international broadcasting program.
In response to this Congressional requirement, the Ford Adminis-
tration issued NSSM 2452 to investigate those measures that might be
taken to improve the effectiveness of US-funded international broad-
casting and to analyze the impact that such measures would have on
current and future US-funded information exchange programs. NSSM
245 was completed but the Ford Administration never submitted the
report based on this study to Congress because of an interagency
dispute on the recommended number of new transmitters.3
Because of the pending Congressional deadline, I recommend that
you submit a letter to the Congress noting that a report was prepared
by the previous Administration but that you intend to submit your own
views and recommendations on this subject (by the end of February).
This will permit the new Cabinet officers and the Directors of OMB
Sent for action. Hyland sent a draft to Brzezinski under an undated covering memoran-
dum. See footnote 3 below.
as well as OMB, USIA, and BIB to undertake a study on the requirements for moderniza-
tion of the broadcasting capabilities of the U.S. Government. See Foreign Relations, 1969–
3 In an undated memorandum to Brzezinski, Hyland reported that State, Defense,
the JCS, USIA, BIB, and the CIA recommended during the Ford administration the
acquisition of 16 new 250KW transmitters for the modernization of U.S. Government
broadcasting in Europe but that OMB insisted that only 12 new transmitters were neces-
sary. The disagreement was never resolved and the final report to Congress was never
issued. Hyland recommended that the conclusions of the report be forwarded to Congress
despite OMB opposition. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material,

Radio Free Europe, Radio Liberty, VOA
and USIA to reconsider the report and submit any disagreements for
your resolution. OMB concurs.
RECOMMENDATION:
That you sign the letters at Tab A to the Speaker of the House and
the President of the Senate.
That you authorize me to request a new review of the report of
the previous Administration.4
4 The President approved the recommendation and signed the letters to the Speaker
of the House and the President of the Senate on January 31. (Ibid.) The final report, sent
to Congress on March 22, recommended the purchase of 16 new additional transmitters
for RFE/RL and VOA broadcasting in Europe as well as 12 additional VOA transmitters
for broadcasting to Asia and Africa. (Public Papers: Carter, 1977, Book I, p. 478)
46.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to the Director of the Office of
Management and Budget (Lance)1
Washington, February 5, 1977
SUBJECT
Broadcasting to the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe
I tried to reach you by phone today, but you took the President at
his word regarding family life!
I hope we can talk urgently about the following item: I feel very
strongly that one of the cheapest ways that we can preserve the peace
and enhance our political objectives is to try to produce internal evolu-
tion in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe. It is much cheaper than
piling up armaments. Precisely because of that, I feel very strongly
that there should be no reductions in the plans for the RFE–RL transmit-
ters. If anything, their activity should be stepped up and in the longer
run we might save billions.
marking; Urgent. Printed from an uninitialed copy.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
I will call you about this on Monday,2 but I would like you to
have this.
2 February 7.
47.
Memorandum From Paul Henze of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, March 10, 1977
SUBJECT
International Broadcasting Issues—Comments, Questions and Answers
The following may be useful to you in discussing these matters
with the President:
1. The BIB, by law, is charged only with sponsorship of Radio Free
Europe and Radio Liberty. The ambitions of certain BIB board and staff
members notwithstanding, it could not extend its responsibilities—to
take over VOA, e.g.—without new legislation.
2. The first priority with the BIB is to get a new chairman for it and
to appoint new members replacing those whose terms are running out.
David Abshire has already resigned as Chairman and two members’
terms, those of Foy Kohler and John P. Roche, run out on 30 April.
3. An important criterion for selecting a new chairman for BIB
is to get a man who will work flexibly and openly with the Carter
Administration and who will be dedicated to strengthening the effec-
tiveness of RFE/RL. John Gronouski appears to us to have these quali-
ties. Frank Stanton, whose appointment is being advocated by Senators
Percy and McGovern and certain BIB staff members (e.g. Walter Rob-
erts) is the principal advocate of a scheme for putting RFE/RL and
VOA under BIB control and for expanding the BIB as a semi-autono-
mous entity for controlling all U.S. international radio broadcasting.
There is no indication when Brzezinski discussed this issue with the President. Attached
but not printed is a summary prepared by the BIB on its relationship with the RFE/RL
and its proposals for consolidation and cost cutting.

Radio Free Europe, Radio Liberty, VOA
These are very controversial proposals which no department or
agency endorses.
4. The BIB has been successfully established over the past three
years and is a good formula for sponsorship of RFE/RL [less than 1
line not declassified] but it has developed a tendency to become an extra
layer of management with its own continually increasing staff. The
radios feel that it interferes too much in day-to-day operations and tends
to pre-empt decisions that are more properly left to the RFE/RL board
of directors (chaired by John Hayes, of the Washington Post-Newsweek
radio/TV empire).
5. The BIB has an important but limited role to play. It should not
become involved in management of the radios. It should not get into
jurisdictional disputes with other U.S. Government elements, trying to
take over VOA, e.g. Its staff should be kept lean and confine its efforts
to true oversight/review functions, as required by law, and to representing
RFE/RL with the Congress.
6. In the form in which it has existed up until now, the BIB has
been dominated by David Abshire, a Nixon appointee, who also heads
a research center at Georgetown University. Foy Kohler has played a
positive role in the BIB, but he has pressed to have too many positions
in the radios filled by retired FSO’s and USIS people. We need younger,
more vigorous people for these demanding jobs. John P. Roche has
been disappointing as a BIB member. The two other BIB members,
John T. Murphy, President of AVCO Broadcasting in Cincinnati, and
Thomas H. Quinn, a young Washington lawyer with no visible qualifi-
cations for the job, were originally appointed for two years and (unfor-
tunately) reappointed for three more last year. The prime reason for
appointment of Murphy was that he was proposed by Senator Taft,
while Quinn was a protege of Senator Pastore. (Congress simply played
favorites here, but there was apparently no effort by the Executive
Branch to propose more effective people.) We could certainly find
better people than these two to serve on this Board, but for the time
being emphasis must be on filling the two vacancies that occur as of
30 April when Kohler’s and Roche’s terms run out.
7. Griffith, whom we are proposing to replace Kohler, is an ideal
choice from the viewpoint of both knowledge of the radios, in depth,
and knowledge of Eastern Europe and the USSR.
8. Since one of the most important functions of the Board is to
serve as the radios’ interface with Congress, we feel a former Congress-
man would be useful on the Board—preferably one with an interest in
international affairs. Also, since only three BIB members can belong
to one political party, the Congressman should be Republican. We now
have clearance from Frank Moore’s office to offer the other BIB vacancy
to Peter H.B. Frelinghuysen, former Congressman from the 5th District

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
of New Jersey, who decided not to run at the end of the 94th Congress
and has retired to private life. (If he turns out not to be interested
we have two other possibilities, both former House members: Clark
MacGregor of Minnesota and Edward Biester of Pennsylvania.)
9. There is considerable Congressional interest in BIB. In the House,
Dante Fascell, who controls their appropriations, tends to take the
deepest interest. In the Senate, Senators Humphrey, Percy and McGov-
ern, among others, have been strong supporters. Though Senators Percy
and McGovern have written the President advocating appointment of
Frank Stanton as BIB Chairman, there is not much reason to believe that
any Congressional group would want to challenge (or could effectively
challenge) strong Presidential leadership in matters relating to the BIB
or international broadcasting in general.
10. There is also not much reason to expect any serious challenge
in Congress to Executive proposals for increased funds for new transmitters
for all the radios (including VOA) and for more modest sums to permit
RFE/RL to hire younger editors from among recent emigres and to expand
broadcasting in Soviet minority languages—aims which are very much in
accord with basic Administration foreign policy objectives and our
championing of human rights.
11. Over the years, the costs of these radios have increased at a far
slower rate than costs of weaponry or costs of intelligence-collecting.
It can be argued that they are, nevertheless, of major significance for
achieving our national security objectives even though they cost—all
together—only a minute fraction of what we spend on a single weapons
system. As we try to bring our national security expenditures into
better balance, we should consider investing more in international
broadcasting. If the Administration makes a strong case, Congress is likely
to support it.
12. You are quite right in feeling that matters relating to the BIB and
to RFE/RL should not be permitted to get mixed up with broader questions
relating to VOA. It may be useful, nevertheless, to review some back-
ground on the VOA “problem” and to brief the President on this subject
when you have the opportunity.
13. Over the past year or so a good deal of agitation, both within
and outside of VOA, has developed for “independence” or “auton-
omy”. Some people advocate setting up the VOA on the same basis
as the BBC. Others want to put it under the BIB. Some apparently
envision melding RFE/RL and VOA into a single international broad-
casting service. Much of the thinking behind these proposals is fuzzy and
the implications have not been well thought through.
14. It is alleged that VOA’s broadcasts have suffered from governmen-
tal interference which has both (a) kept it from broadcasting completely
on certain delicate topics and (b) forced it to take particular lines on

Radio Free Europe, Radio Liberty, VOA
subjects the State Department or the White House felt strongly about
at particular times. The arguments tend to be over very fine points
and tend to cancel each other out. Considering the challenges VOA has
had to face over recent years—coping with the Vietnam withdrawal,
Watergate, problems of domestic dissidence—a strong case can be
made that it has carried out its mission extremely well. (During the
past 7½ years it has been headed by Ken Giddens, an Alabama Republi-
can broadcasting executive who has set an all-time record for tenure
in his job and seems to have performed very well.)
15. In any event, there are strong arguments against reaching con-
clusions on the basis of the unusual circumstances which have existed
during the past few years. A case could be made also that the strongest
proponents of “autonomy” for the VOA and of placing VOA under
BIB along with RFE/RL, tend to make “best case” assumptions about
the way the world is going to develop during the next decade or two
and “worst case” assumptions about the way the U.S. Government is
going to operate. According to their contentions, the VOA is always
in danger of being misused by the White House, the State Department
or some other element of the U.S. Government for short-term, tenden-
tious, partisan or other narrow purposes. Only an “independent” VOA
can allegedly broadcast objectively (whatever that is supposed to
mean). This is very specious argumentation. If VOA could broadcast with
objectivity during the difficult Watergate period (I listened to it continually
during this time; its performance was outstanding), the greatest period of strain
the U.S. Government has experienced since the Civil War, why shouldn’t we
expect it to operate effectively in the future when we have no reason to expect
such strains again soon?
16. The 35-year history of the VOA provides very little evidence of
tendentious broadcasting or misuse by particular Administrations. It may
have been overly polemic in the 1950’s (more so than RFE at times)
and slow to report news of major interest to its listeners; more often
it was accused of being dull. But critics of radio stations usually run
the full gamut of possible accusations and extreme criticisms are seldom
a very good standard for judging impact. During the past 10–15 years,
VOA has settled into a pattern of very competent broadcasting of news,
entertainment and features about American life that clearly appeal to
listeners and keep them well informed. (I have listened to VOA steadily
during my time abroad over the past eight years and consider that it
is doing an excellent job of what can reasonably be expected of it.)
17. Why shouldn’t the VOA be under direct U.S. Government manage-
ment and present itself as the Voice of the U.S. Government and, ipso facto,
the American people? Whom, really, would an “independent” or “auton-
omous” VOA represent? Why shouldn’t the VOA reflect American
policies and explain American government positions? Obviously, it

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
should not be narrowly propagandistic, but why assume that a properly
led U.S. Government is going to want it to be? Why should the U.S.
Government abdicate responsibility for managing a major information
instrument in a world that wishes to have American positions and
American values explained to it and wishes to be informed on what
is happening in the United States?
18. An Administration which divested itself of control over VOA
might well find that it had created more problems for itself than it had
eliminated. There is the danger that VOA could drift into an adversary
position against the government; this is probably less serious danger
than decline in effectiveness and relevance.
19. None of this is to say that VOA could not benefit from some
improvements. Tight budgets and strict adherence to civil service
requirements have resulted in broadcast staffs that tend toward the
elderly and unimaginative. There is a case to be made for broadcasting
in more languages, for there is now hardly any corner of the world
where cheap radio receivers are not within reach of practically every-
one. There is, also a case for reviewing VOA’s position in our govern-
mental structure and for taking a fresh look at the way in which it is
given policy and administrative guidance. But this should be done
objectively and by persons free of the partisan views that have grown
up around some of these questions in the past few years.
20. All of the U.S. Government’s international broadcasting instru-
ments have been essentially marking time during recent years. Tech-
nically, they are all behind their competitors. A program for strengthening
them needs to be put into effect immediately. They have all been kept
under such tight budgetary restrictions that they have not been able
to experiment with more creative programming approaches or more
appealing ways of delivering news and information. They need to be
given the means of doing so. Both technically and substantively, they
need to be infused with new dynamism. Technical developments which
are now on the horizon—direct satellite broadcasting, e.g.—may pro-
vide the means of greatly increasing the impact of our international
broadcasting instruments a few years from now. We should rejuvenate
them so that they can take full advantage of what technological break-
throughs may offer.

Radio Free Europe, Radio Liberty, VOA
48.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, undated
SUBJECT
Appointment of New Chairman of Board for International Broadcasting
Appointment of a new Chairman of the Board of International
Broadcasting (BIB—the RFE/RL sponsoring organization) should take
place as soon as possible to forestall possible controversy over this
organization. The outgoing Chairman, David Abshire, and certain other
Board and Staff members are maneuvering to control new appoint-
ments and are drawing Senators Percy and McGovern into arguments
with the Administration over who should serve on the Board and how
it should operate.2 This has resulted over the weekend in distorted
stories (Tab A)3 in both the New York Times and Washington Post attack-
ing Professor William Griffith of MIT, whom I have suggested be
appointed a Board Member.4 The newspaper stories do not mention
our choice5 as Chairman, John Gronouski, but advocate appointment
of Frank Stanton as Chairman.
Outside System. Sent for action. Carter wrote at the top of the document: “To Ham[Hamil-
ton Jordan]—O.K. with me. Check w/ State first. JC.”
2 In a May 4 memorandum to Brzezinski, Henze reported that Percy had introduced
an amendment to have VOA set up autonomously, as well as other changes to the USIA/
CU reorganization which, Henze suggested, amounted to implementation of the Stanton
report. Henze recommended that the White House make clear to key Senate and House
members its opposition to the Stanton report. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs,
Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 112, Radio Free
Europe/Radio Liberty/Voice of America: 1977)
3 Attached but not printed
4 Brzezinski forwarded a memorandum to Jordan on June 17 that recommended
the nominations of Rita Hauser and William Griffith to membership in the BIB Board.
(Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File,
Subject Chron File, Box 64, Board of International Broadcasting: 1977) Although Griffith
was not nominated, Hauser’s nomination was announced on November 14. Frank
Markoe, Jr., was nominated to replace Foy Kohler who had resigned earlier. (Public
Papers: Carter, 1977, Book II, p. 2024)
5 An unidentified hand, possibly Jordan, circled the words “our choice” and wrote
in the margin “whose?” Carter submitted Gronouski’s nomination to the Senate on June

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
Stanton is the author of an extremely controversial set of proposals
for changes in U.S. Government information programs.6 Making him
Chairman of the BIB would be, in effect, to endorse his program.
The ultimate effect of this program would be to take international
broadcasting out of the control of the Administration.
To nip this controversy in the bud, I recommend that you announce as
soon as possible the appointment of Gronouski.7 It will be difficult for
anyone to make a case against him. He is a natural choice as a prominent
Democrat and a man with previous experience (Ambassador to Poland,
e.g.) which fits him for the BIB job. I am confident that he will work
with the Administration to get the BIB restructured in an intelligent
way. Once he has been appointed we can proceed to the two other
vacancies for which I recommend Professor Griffith and former Con-
gressman Peter Frelinghuysen of New Jersey.
6 In a March 18 memorandum to Carter, Brzezinski described the report as advocat-
ing the fragmentation of U.S. information policy by, among other things, abolishing
USIA and setting up the Information and Cultural Affairs Agency under the Department
of State, and establishing a separate Board to govern VOA activities. The Board would
eventually be merged with the BIB, leading to the merger of VOA and RFE/RL. (Carter
Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 9, Board for
7 In a March 14 memorandum to Carter, Jordan reported his discussion with Vance
regarding Gronouski’s nomination as BIB Chairman. Jordan indicated that, while Vance
preferred Stanton, he had no objection to Gronouski. Jordan also stated that Senators
McGovern and Percy continued to support Stanton, but would be hard pressed to oppose
Gronouski’s nomination. Carter wrote at the top of the memo: “CC: Ham[ilton Jordan],
Zbig. What are the key elements of the Stanton Report? J.” (Ibid.)
49.
Editorial Note
On March 15, 1977, the Department of State sent a circular telegram
to all Eastern European posts and Moscow and Bonn informing them
of the ongoing debate about relocating Radio Free Europe (RFE) and
Radio Liberty (RL) from their headquarters in Munich to the United
States. The telegram asked for the post’s analysis of the relocation, in
terms of reaction by both the government and the audience in their
respective countries. The Embassy in Bonn, specifically, was also asked
to assess West German perceptions of the U.S. commitment to Europe
in case of a relocation, as well as the effect on West German commitment
to maintain transmitters and any RFE/RL crew on German soil. (Tele-

Radio Free Europe, Radio Liberty, VOA
Central Foreign Policy File, D770089–0757) For Bonn’s response, see
Document 50.
The Embassy in Budapest responded on March 21 in telegram 885
that it expected little change in the attitude of either the Hungarian
Government or the Hungarian population to a relocation of RFE to
the United States. The Embassy concluded that the lack of significant
hostility toward RFE on the part of the Hungarian Government meant
that its attitude toward the radio would change minimally. (National
however, was a special case.
The Embassy in Bucharest noted on March 22 in telegram 2100
that the move would “seriously damage both ‘rapport’ with its audi-
ence, and quality of its broadcast and research product.” The Embassy
concluded that such a move might also “make RFE even more of a
contentious bilateral issue by highlighting U.S. responsibility for RFE
broadcasting.” Ambassador Barnes concluded there was “no political
merit to any such move.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
Policy File, D770098–0042)
Like the Embassy in Bucharest, the Embassy in Warsaw was also
adamantly opposed to the idea of moving RFE to the United States.
They wrote: “The opposition of the Polish regime to RFE/RL is based
above all on the RFE’s demonstrated ability to respond quickly to
events in Poland and to broadcast back into the country a true
and usually balanced account of what is happening here.” The transfer
to the United States would impair, the Embassy believed, the ability
of the Radios to respond quickly to developments in the country. Just
as importantly, “Poland’s intellectuals and other listeners would see a
shift of the radios to the United States as signifying a reduction of US
interest in Poland and a retreat under Soviet pressure.” (Telegram 2066
from Warsaw, March 24; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
Policy File, D770101–1072)
Like the others, the Embassy in Sofia also concluded that a move
to the United States would damage the timeliness and flavor of RFE
reporting. It also stressed that the Government of Bulgaria would inter-
pret the move as a victory for its “unremitting public and private
hostility to RFE,” a conclusion, the Embassy suggested, that might also
be shared by many in the Bulgarian public. The Embassy also suggested
that a move would be interpreted by the Bulgarian Government as
evidence that West Germany “has seen the light” in no longer permit-
ting RFE/RL to operate from their soil, as well as, at least partial
acknowledgement that RFE/RL were “not fully consistent with Hel-
sinki [Accords].” (Telegram 625 from Sofia, March 23; National
The Embassy in Prague, however, believed that a move, if properly
explained in advance, could provide tangible benefits. (Telegram 811

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
from Prague, March 29; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
Policy File, D770108–0439)
In telegram 4013 from Moscow, March 25, the Embassy wrote that
“there is, of course, nothing the Radios could do that would reconcile
the Soviet authorities to their existence.” The Embassy further sug-
gested that the Soviets would see the move as a sign of weakness, and
would not relent in their propaganda against the Radios. They reported:
“Moscow would portray the move to the States as resulting from the
effectiveness of Moscow’s ‘principled stand’” and would “be encour-
aged to step up their efforts to attain this goal” of shutting down the
Radios. While the Embassy did not believe that target audiences in the
Soviet Union considered the physical location of the Radios, it did
suggest that the use by Radio Liberty of recent émigrés, “including
people with a reputation in the Soviet Union” was very effective. A
move of the Radios, the telegram concluded, would make the use of
émigrés much more difficult. (National Archives, RG 59, Central
Foreign Policy File, D770104–0140)
50.
Telegram From the Embassy in the Federal Republic of
Germany to the Department of State1
Begin Summary: The Embassy views a possible relocation of a
major portion of RFE/RL’s activities to the U.S. as fraught with substan-
tial political danger and no discernible benefit. End summary.
1. The Embassy’s replies to the Department’s questions in the
reftel follow:
2. A. Q: How would a major relocation of the Radios affect FRG
perceptions of the U.S. presence and commitment in Europe?
A: The FRG is very sensitive to any indication of change in the
U.S. commitment to Europe. The FRG welcomes a large U.S. presence
in Europe—and in the FRG—because it sees such a presence as a visible
sign of the U.S. commitment. Relocation to the US of any major U.S.
Confidential; Limdis. Sent for information to Moscow, Warsaw, Prague, Budapest, Bucha-
rest, Sofia, London, Paris, Munich, and USNATO.
2 See Document 49.

Radio Free Europe, Radio Liberty, VOA
facility or activity would give rise to some fears, both privately and
publicly expressed, that the U.S. is withdrawing to “Fortress America.”
While the reaction to a move by the Radios to the U.S. would be less
than, for example, a decision to reduce dramatically the U.S. troop
presence in the FRG, there would nevertheless be a negative reaction in
the FRG to the move and questioning of the U.S. commitment to Europe.
B. Q: Would a move at this time be perceived as a backing down
from our Helsinki commitments in the face of increased Soviet and
East European attacks against the Radios?
A: Yes. The attacks on the Radios made by Communist states have
risen dramatically since the signing of the Helsinki Accords. If we were
to relocate to the U.S., or make any other substantial change, such as
reduction in broadcasting hours or alteration of broadcast content, we
should expect speculation that the change was caused by pressure from
the East. We should also expect the Communist states to further this
impression through their propaganda activities. If a decision to relocate
were announced during the Belgrade Conference, the speculation that
the move was made as a result of Eastern attacks would be much
higher than if the announcement were made at another time.
C. Q: How would such a move affect FRG internal politics, and
might the relocation become a domestic political issue? To what effect?
A: The FRG has just undergone a long, if not major, debate over
the effect that an administrative consolidation of the two German radios
which broadcast to the East will have over the content of broadcasts
to the Soviet Union. The conservative opposition accused the govern-
ment of trying to throttle criticism of the USSR through the consolida-
tion move. It is probable that a similar debate would erupt over reloca-
tion. The CDU/CSU would undoubtedly accuse any SPD Government
of being behind a relocation of the Radios from the FRG. If we said
that this was not the case, the CDU/CSU would question our judgment
in moving the Radios from Munich. Thus, relocation could be an embar-
rassment to the government. Having said that, we do not believe that
it would become a major domestic issue in the FRG.
D. Q: Would a move reduce the FRG resolve and commitment to
international broadcasting?
A: Yes. Those people in the FRG who support the Radios regard
them as the “front line” of Western broadcasting efforts. They realize
that if RFE/RL were to disappear tomorrow, Eastern attacks on
Deutsche Welle and Deutschland Funk would increase in intensity.
There would be a natural reaction “to give up the fight, especially since
the Americans do not care any more.” Furthermore, given the extremely
overcrowded situation in the European airwaves, we could not expect
the same support from the FRG which we currently receive in defense
of the Radios’ frequencies.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
E. Q: Would a move make it difficult to maintain the necessary
RFE/RL skeleton equipment and personnel, including transmitters, in
the FRG?
A: Yes (with emphasis). The FRG receives some benefits (payroll,
etc.) from the employment of Radio personnel in the FRG, principally
Munich. The transfer of these employees to the U.S. removes some of
the immediate benefits that the presence of the Radios in the FRG
brings to the FRG. At the same time, if we leave transmitters and a
skeleton staff in the FRG, the Germans remain politically liable for the
Radios. We have recently upgraded the transmitting we do from the
FRG through the importation of ten new 100 KW transmitters for Biblis
and Lambertheim. We may further upgrade our transmitting facilities
at Holzkirchen. We have received full cooperation and support from
the FRG, including customs exemptions for the transmitters in this
endeavor. If we wish to continue these operations from German terri-
tory, we must recognize that we will have more than a skeleton opera-
tion in the FRG, even with the transfer of the bulk of Radio personnel
from Munich.
3. Comment: There are people in the FRG who support the Radios
and there are people who do not. Generally speaking, the spectrum of
opinion is about the same as in the U.S., with the important exception
that a much larger percentage of the German population is aware of
and has strong opinions about the operation of the Radios. There are
undoubtedly pressures on the German Government to reduce its sup-
port for the Radios. Some of these pressures are from the Communist
nations. Others are from factions within the FRG, most notably the left
wing of the SPD. There are high ranking officials in the FRG Govern-
ment who would be much more comfortable if the Radios were located
somewhere else. However, it is noteworthy that, during the past few
years when the FRG has dramatically improved its relations with the
USSR and Eastern Europe, official German support for the Radios has
never slackened. Since we should expect the Communist nations to
continue to attack the radios and their presence in the FRG, no matter
how small that presence is, we should resign ourselves to the expecta-
tion that Eastern European attacks on the Radios in the FRG will not
lessen if major portions of their activities are moved to the U.S. German
resolution to defend the Radios may.
4. Quite aside from questions deriving from their presence in the
FRG, the Embassy would like to express its agreement with observa-

Radio Free Europe, Radio Liberty, VOA
tions of our Embassies in Eastern Europe.3 It is difficult to see how
relocation to the U.S. would not adversely affect the quality of broad-
casting. Furthermore, while we are not expert, we question the esti-
mated savings to the Radios. For example, Radio management in Mu-
nich claims that the projected savings disappear as the $/dm exchange
rate rises to 2.70. We recommend that the Department look long and
hard at the estimated savings.
Stoessel
3 See Document 49.
51.
Telegram From the Embassy in the Federal Republic of
Germany to the Department of State1
10177. For the Secretary. Subject: Schmidt’s Visit to Washington;
His Concern About RFE/RL.
1. At a luncheon he gave for new Ambassadors July 15, I talked
with Chancellor Schmidt privately about his trip to Washington in July.2
2. He said he looked forward to another general review with the
President of most of the subjects they had touched on in London.3 The
nuclear question, of course, would be one of the items. He hoped the
seven-nation study would go well, but was concerned about difficulties
the French might cause. Schmidt also noted briefly that the human
rights issue, which he thought had been “cleared up” in London, seems
to have arisen again. However, he hoped things would calm down
and that Belgrade would go reasonably well. (He was not specific in
his remarks, but he may have been referring to recent high-level US
statements on human rights. A James Reston column carried in the
Secret; Priority; Nodis.
2 Documentation on discussions between Carter and Schmidt is scheduled for publi-
cation in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XXVII, Western Europe.
Europe.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
Paris Herald Tribune June 16 cites German concerns in this regard and
was written after Reston had seen the Chancellor.)
3. The main thing on Schmidt’s mind, however, was RFE/RL and
the US intention to install new, more powerful transmitters at the site
near Munich. He said this was a matter he planned to take up with
the President. He regretted that he had not been consulted about the
decision on the transmitters and said he had ordered that issuance of
the required FRG license for installation of the transmitters be held up
pending his personal review. It was possible, he said, that he would
not approve the license.
4. Schmidt said he was placed in an uncomfortable position by
RFE/RL; the stations were on FRG territory, but he had no control
over the content of their broadcasts. While he had not been pressed
recently by the Soviets on the subject, it was likely that Brezhnev would
raise it when he came to Bonn in the fall. Schmidt said he had told the
previous US administration that he expected the stations to be phased
out within two or three years, but things seemed to be going in the
opposite direction.
5. I told Schmidt that we attached great importance to RFE/RL.
The location of the transmitters in Germany was the most effective in
terms of reaching the target audiences and I thought it would have
most unfortunate implications if the operations of the Radios were
limited. I stressed the President’s personal interest in RFE/RL and
said I was sure he would wish to consider Schmidt’s views carefully.
Schmidt said he understood the mission of the Radios but wondered
if it might not be feasible for the broadcasts to be carried out somewhere
else than in the FRG.
6. Comment: There have been earlier intimations of Schmidt’s
reservations about RFE/RL, but his comments to me are more specific
than anything we have had before.4 I seriously doubt if he would
go so far as to deny the license for the new transmitters or push
for removal of the stations from the FRG, since such actions would
expose him to a storm of criticism from the opposition. However,
it is clear he is irritated by the lack of consultation concerning the
Jürgen Ruhfus recounted Schmidt’s displeasure at not being consulted on the decision
to modernize and expand the transmitters in West Germany. Ruhfus, however, “was
not sure what the Chancellor’s official position on this subject would be during his
conversations with the President because there was considerable disagreement within
the coalition about what should be done regarding the Radios. He said it was uncertain
that Schmidt would want to risk the domestic political turmoil that could follow if the
Radios were to be removed or their activity reduced at his request.” (National Archives,

Radio Free Europe, Radio Liberty, VOA
transmitters and that it is his present intention to raise the question
directly with the President.
7. In addition to readying our positions on the Radios in anticipa-
tion of a possible discussion when Schmidt is in Washington, it occurs
to me that it might be useful in defusing the situation if the President
could communicate directly and informally with Schmidt about it
before their meeting. If the President has occasion to telephone the
Chancellor on other matters, a brief reference to the radio/transmitter
problem and an expression of readiness to discuss the Chancellor’s
concerns frankly could be helpful.
Stoessel
52.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, undated
SUBJECT
Chancellor Schmidt’s Complaint About RFE/RL Expansion2
In the attached cable, Ambassador Stoessel reports that Chancellor
Schmidt indicated he would raise the issue of Radio Free Europe/
Radio Liberty with you.3 Schmidt expressed irritation at not being
consulted about the expansion of transmitter facilities near Munich
(which you approved and sent to Congress in March) and more general
unhappiness about having the radios broadcast from German soil but
with no German control of content.
The issue is an old one:
Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 112, Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty/Voice of
America: 1977. Secret. Printed from an uninitialed copy. A notation at the top of the
first page indicates that this memorandum was retyped for Brzezinski on July 1. In a
June 21 memorandum, Brzezinski asked Hyland to prepare a memorandum for Carter
on Schmidt’s position on RFE/RL modernization as reported in telegram 10177 from
Bonn, June 17. (Ibid.)
2 The Department of State prepared a memorandum on the subject, which it for-
warded to the White House on June 29. (Memorandum from Tarnoff to Brzezinski, June
29; Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 9,
3 See Document 51.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
—The transmitter expansion program was cleared with and neces-
sary licenses requested from the FRG ministry of post and telecommun-
ications, though there is no evidence that Schmidt or Genscher were
specifically consulted by U.S. officials.
—Schmidt’s concern over his lack of control of RFE/RL content
may be exacerbated by his qualms about aspects of East-West relations,
including human rights problems.
Schmidt seems to have put the radios on the agenda for his visit
to Washington. I believe we should try to respond to his concerns
while stressing the importance we attach to the radios and to their
location in the Federal Republic.4
You could also admit that RFE/RL sometimes operated in the past
as though they were autonomous even of the U.S. Government, and
your reconstitution of the Board for International Broadcasting (the
RFE/RL parent) is designed to correct that. You should also add the
strong U.S. interest in the continued effectiveness of these radios.5
Finally, it is noteworthy that Schmidt would be strongly opposed
by the CDU if he tried to take action, and the FDP (his coalition partner)
might not support him.6
4 On July 8, Vance forwarded a briefing memorandum to Carter in preparation for
the meeting with Schmidt. Vance suggested that, in the event Schmidt raised the issue
of RFE/RL, Carter should respond that the administration regards RFE/RL as essential
to informing the people of Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union, and that a reduction
or withdrawal of the transmitters and radios would be perceived by Moscow and the
United States public as a retreat in the face of Soviet pressure. (Carter Library, National
Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 63, PRC 023, Schmidt Visit)
lor raised subject of RFE/RL operations in FRG in general and new transmitters in
particular with President in private conversation at the White House evening of July
13” and, according to accounts by the West German Ambassador to the United States
and MFA State Secretary Schueler, “the President listened to Schmidt’s presentation
with interest and said he would give further consideration to the subject.” (National
tion of the Carter-Schmidt discussion on RFE/RL was not found.
Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 112,
Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty/Voice of America: 1977)

Radio Free Europe, Radio Liberty, VOA
53.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
the Federal Republic of Germany1
200014. Subject: RFE/RL Holzkirchen Modernization. Ref: Bonn
12578.2 For the Ambassador.
1. The Department and White House have reviewed this question
on the basis of your report (reftel) concerning discussions during Chan-
2. You are instructed to seek an appointment with State Secretary
Schueler as soon as possible to make a presentation based on the
following aide-memoire. You are authorized to draw on its text in
making your points orally. You should leave the aide-memoire with
Schueler and report his reaction.4
3. Begin text.
Aide Memoire
Secret; Exdis. Drafted by Seymour and Klingaman; cleared by Andrews, Woessner,
Luers, Vine, Roberts, Dodson, and Goldsmith; approved by Vest.
the White House and the Department of State on how to handle the issue of RFE/RL
In an August 2 memorandum to Brzezinski, Treverton and Hunter cited the telegram
as evidence of the growing perception in Bonn that Carter was willing to reduce the
visibility of the Radios. Treverton, Hunter, and Henze argued that Carter should clarify
his position with the West German Government. (Carter Library, National Security
Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 9, Board for International Broadcasting
3 In an August 6 memorandum to Brzezinski, Tarnoff wrote that, while Schmidt
would like closer consultations and, ultimately, the removal of the transmitters from
FRG territory, “it is unlikely that he would go so far as to deny the license or push for
the stations’ removal from the FRG.” Tarnoff asked the White House to authorize the
Department to instruct Stroessel to take up the RFE/RL issue with West German State
Secretary Schueler and inform him that “the President had reviewed the Holzkirchen
transmitter question and determined that the replacement of the four underpowered
transmitters with four new 250 KW transmitters is necessary to our overall broadcasting
effort to Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union.” (Ibid.) On August 9, the White House
tasked the Department of State with drafting and submitting to the White House for
clearance a note verbale. (Memorandum from Dodson to Tarnoff, August 9; Carter
Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 9, Board for
1317) In accordance with subsequent instructions, Meehan delivered the aide mémoire

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
President Carter has given thorough consideration to the question
of replacing the four 10 KW transmitters at Holzkirchen with four new
250 KW transmitters, as he had promised Chancellor Schmidt he would
has concluded that replacement of the transmitters is necessary to our
overall broadcasting effort to Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union.
This conclusion is based on the results of a recent detailed study of the
U.S. international broadcasting effort, which revealed that the current
overall capacity of 400KW would be eleven percent below5 the mini-
mum level required for effective broadcasting into Eastern Europe and
the USSR, even if all governments in the area were to cease jamming,
which some have shown little indication of doing.6
We have further concluded that Radio Free Europe and Radio
Liberty play a very important role in the exchange of information and
the support of Western and democratic values. The audiences for these
stations in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe have come to depend
in varying degrees on their broadcasts for a balanced and comprehen-
sive view of international developments.
Our request to upgrade the Holzkirchen facility is a continuation
of a process to modernize Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty facilities
in Europe. As far as Germany is concerned it goes back to the late
nineteen-sixties when authorization was granted by the Federal Repub-
lic to replace four older and lower-powered transmitters at Lamper-
theim with four 250 KW transmitters. Budgetary restrictions prevented
our replacing the transmitters at that time. A formal request to upgrade
1976 FRG authorization was given to build six 100 KW transmitters
in Holzkirchen. This authorization was subsequently reduced to the
replacement of four existing 10 KW transmitters by four 100 KW trans-
mitters. However, on the basis of a Presidential study7 of Voice of
America and Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty technical deficiencies
requested by Congress in the summer of 1976, completed in December
aide mémoire, changing “current overall capacity of 400 KW would be eleven percent
below” to “the current overall capacity of Voice of America, Radio Free Europe, and
Radio Liberty would be eleven percent below.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central
Foreign Policy File, D770308–0934)
the text here was changed from “which some have shown little indication of doing” to
“which some have shown no indication of doing.”
the text here was changed from “however, on the basis of a Presidential study” to “on
the basis of the aforementioned study.”

Radio Free Europe, Radio Liberty, VOA
1976, and sent to Congress in March 1977, we asked that the license
for the four 100 KW transmitters be upgraded to four 250 KW.
The United States wishes to emphasize that there will not be any
increase in the number of frequencies or transmitters. It was with this
consideration in mind that, following discussions with the Ministry of
Post, the United States agreed to revise its original request made in
February 1976 for six 100 KW transmitters to the current pending
application for four 250 KW transmitters.
The United States requests that the Federal Republic agree to license
the four 250 KW transmitters as soon as possible. End text.
Christopher
54.
Memorandum of Conversation1
SUBJECT
Dr. Brzezinski’s Meeting with Chancellor Helmut Schmidt
PARTICIPANTS
Helmut Schmidt, Chancellor of the Federal Republic of Germany
Juergen Ruhfus, Assistant Secretary for Political Affairs
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
Walter Stoessel, US Ambassador to the FRG
Gregory F. Treverton, NSC Staff Member
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to RFE/RL.]
Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty
The Chancellor raised one final issue, saying it did not need to be
discussed then. He said emphatically that he was not satisfied with
the operations of RFE and RL, nor with his dealings with the radios.
“If you want to broadcast propaganda, fine, but do it from your own
soil.” Dr. Brzezinski said he was compelled to respond. The radios are
the West German version, see Akten zur Auswärtigen Politik der Bundesrepublik Deutschland
on the memorandum indicates that for the first seventy minutes, Brzezinski and Schmidt
met alone.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
part of a larger US presence in the FRG. Their purpose is not propa-
ganda, but the promotion of better East-West relations. One of the
reasons that Gierek is able to steer the course he has is that the popula-
tion behind him receives Western ideas.
The Chancellor repeated that his did not like the radios operating
from his soil. German law is not applied to them, and he said he did
not know what they did. They are covered by no US-German treaty;
instead they are a relic of occupation. He said he was greatly suspicious
of them and felt they often had dealings with the German secret service.
He said that within two to three years, either the radios’ operation
should be governed by some formal agreement or should cease. He
mentioned that he had talked to the President about the radios; the
US response since then showed that “you don’t understand my situa-
tion.” The radios cooperate with the opposition parties. There are so
many negative aspects: foreign policy, internal security, domestic
politics.
[3 lines not declassified] They are supported by Congressional appro-
priations and supervised by a Board for International Broadcasting.
The Chancellor asked if technically the broadcasts do not originate
from Spain and Portugal. Dr. Brzezinski said that was true, that they
came from there as well as other locales including Germany. He noted
the radios’ strong support in Congress. New arrangements might be
possible over several years, but if the FRG took a rash action that would
touch off a major debate.
The Chancellor said he had told Henry Kissinger two years before
that the radio operations from Germany had to cease. At that point
there was less Congressional interest. He reiterated that the radios are
outside the law, their operations unknown to him. Dr. Brzezinski asked
if the US armed forces network posed a similar problem. The Chancellor
responded that it too was not controlled by German law but was less
of a problem since it broadcast in English. It might be regarded as
covered, in a general way, by the Status of Forces Agreement. But he
could not accept forever a situation in which RFE/RL work closely
with his political opponents. When Dr. Brzezinski asked how, the
Chancellor responded that the radios shared analyses—more or less
good—with his political opponents. Dr. Brzezinski said that should
not happen; the radios should not be linked to domestic politics.
Dr. Brzezinski said that if history could be replayed, perhaps the
radios should be elsewhere. But they are useful as a joint effort, to
compensate for the absence of more normal means of communicating
with the peoples of the East. The Chancellor replied that the radios
had played a subversive role in the 1968 Czechoslovakia crisis, but Dr.
Brzezinski said he was not sure; only in 1956 was he certain their
role had been as the Chancellor described. The Chancellor asked Dr.

Radio Free Europe, Radio Liberty, VOA
Brzezinski to look at the records of his meeting with Kissinger and the
agreement to phase out the radios in three years. That would indicate
how seriously he takes the issue.
The Chancellor said he had even thought of taking his intelligence
service out of Munich—at a cost of billions of dollars—to break the
contact with the radios. Dr. Brzezinski said there should not be such
contact; the radios are supposed to be very controlled. The Chancellor
responded that it is hard to control such contacts because they are
covert. He said the US would never accept, say, a French station broad-
casting from the US into Quebec. Not, Dr. Brzezinski agreed, unless
the US also wanted to liberate Quebec. He felt the radios’ content was
no longer as hard line as it had been. However, the Chancellor said
he had read some ugly reports. More generally, many of the refugees
who came a quarter of a century ago are not good. They are very
much Cold Warriors and sometimes attack, or even murder, newer
immigrants. Dr. Brzezinski noted that we have comparable problems
with Yugoslav immigrants, now perhaps with Cubans.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to RFE/RL.]
55.
Telegram From the Embassy in the Federal Republic of
Germany to the Department of State1
20064. USBER for Ambassador Stoessel. Subject: RFE/RL: Visit of
BIB Chairman Gronouski.
Summary: Foreign Office officials confirmed to visiting BIB Chair-
man Gronouski their support for approval of Holzkirchen moderniza-
tion and RFE/RL amalgamation applications. The Foreign Office would
present this position in discussions with the Chancellery. While a veto
by Chancellor Schmidt could not be excluded, these officials were
Confidential; Priority; Exdis. Sent for information to Munich and West Berlin.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
cautiously optimistic about prospects for approval.2 The Chancellery
would soon be instructing the Foreign Office to begin consultations
with the Embassy on these and other issues involving the Radios. FRG
officials expressed some concern over cosmetics of prospective move
of RFE/RL presidency from Washington to Munich and Gronouski
agreed to look at matter from that perspective. Wide-ranging discus-
sions also dealt with accreditation to Olympic Games, jamming, pro-
gram content and possible change in nomenclature of Radios. End
summary.
1. Board for International Broadcasting (BIB) Chairman Gronouski
and BIB Executive Director Roberts visited Bonn November 28 and
29 to discuss RFE/RL affairs with FRG officials. Gronouski briefed
Chancellery (Political Director Ruhfus) and Foreign Office (State Minis-
ter Von Dohnanyi; Deputy Assistant Secretary Meyer-Landrut; and
Deputy Director of Office charged with Radio Affairs Bauch) officials
on his perception of Radio’s functions and matters of current interest.
Principal comments of Gronouski and German officials are summa-
rized below:
2. Holzkirchen modernization: Gronouski outlined work of Eisen-
hower Commission, noting recommendation to upgrade outmoded
transmitter equipment at Holzkirchen and other stations. This recom-
mendation predated present administration and was a technical imper-
ative if Radios were to transmit effectively. President Carter had agreed
with this recommendation and result had been his March 22 request
to upgrade transmitters.
Foreign Office officials (Meyer-Landrut and Bauch) confirmed that
Ministry supported request to modernize Holzkirchen. The Foreign
Office would discuss with the Chancellery the political questions
involved and would urge approval. While the Chancellor had reserva-
tions about an increasing presence of the Radios in Germany, they
were cautiously optimistic that approval would be forthcoming. They
cautioned, however, that approval could take some time and they
for the transmitter modernization would not be given before the end of the Belgrade
Conference and even then the full request might not be granted. “The present German
analysis,” Stoessel reported, “was that the increased power we were seeking would
enable transmissions from Holzkirchen to extend beyond its present target area into
Central Asia, where nationality problems are of particular concern to the Soviet Govern-
ment.” Stoessel advised Vest to stress in his upcoming meeting with West German
Foreign Ministry Political Director Klaus Blech “the importance the USG attaches to early
and favorable action on our application for upgrading the transmitters at Holzkirchen.”
Vest raised the issue on December 20 with Blech who reported that the Foreign Ministry
had recommended approval of the U.S. application. (Telegram 304575 to Bonn, December

Radio Free Europe, Radio Liberty, VOA
counseled patience. At one point, Meyer-Landrut said, “we will get it,
just be patient.”
Ruhfus said the Foreign Office would be instructed to consult with
the Embassy on Holzkirchen and other outstanding issues involving
the Radios. The Chancellor had a strong personal interest in the Radios
and reference was made to his discussions in 1974 with Secretary
Kissinger and in 1977 with President Carter. Ruhfus realized that a
prompt response was required and he hoped a solution could be found
“more in line with our situation here and our sovereignty.” He did not
indicate what the Chancellery decision might be though he generally
maintained a positive approach toward the Radios, noting that their
value as a source of info in Eastern Europe had again been brought
home to him during his visit to Poland with the Chancellor.
Begin comment: Meyer-Landrut later told us the suggestion of
Foreign Office-Embassy consultations had been his idea and Ruhfus
had readily agreed. As noted above, Meyer-Landrut supports approval
of the Holzkirchen application. End comment.
State Minister Von Dohnanyi was in general more reserved on
Holzkirchen. While it might be desirable from a technical standpoint,
politically it represented an increase in radio presence which ran coun-
ter to the Chancellor’s desires. The matter must therefore be handled
delicately. Though there were basically no differences in our foreign
policy, including our approach to detente, there were shadings of
emphasis which affected broadcast policy toward the East. The Radios
were now operating in a new era of German sovereignty and this, too,
had to be taken into account. This made the FRG very cautious and it
would be necessary to review the matter carefully.
Begin comment: Von Dohnanyi’s unhelpful approach is not indica-
tive of Foreign Office policy. As a Parliamentary State Minister, Von
Dohnanyi has no line responsibility within the Ministry and is not in
the decision-making chain on this issue. Nonetheless, he is an important
figure in the SPD and his opinion may be more reflective of Party
sentiment. If his views are widespread within the Party—and we have
no evidence that they are—it will have an impact on the Holzkirchen
decision. End comment.
3. RFE/RL amalgamation and Vorbehalt (reservation clause):
Bauch believed the Postal Ministry would issue a new license for the
merged corporation within a few weeks. There were no problems here.
He hoped working-level action on the reservation clause (Vorbehalt)
could be concluded this week or next. (The final draft would basically
resemble the 1955 RFE and RL letters to German Foreign Office). There
would then be a meeting with the Postal Ministry. If the Chancellery
did not express an interest in clearing the wording—and Bauch did
not expect that they would—the text would be approved and communi-
cated to the Embassy.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
4. Movement of Presidency to Munich: Gronouski explained that
the prospective shift of the Presidency from Washington to Munich by
upgrading the position of Executive Vice President would permit
tighter policy and administrative control over radio output. This would
help insure its conformity with established policy guidelines. We real-
ized, however, that political sensitivities in the FRG might be better
accommodated by a de facto shift in which the Munich position would
assume broader functions while retaining the same title. The reaction
of FRG officials varied. Ruhfus agreed on the need for tighter control
of radio broadcasting. He believed the shift could be an effective means
of accomplishing this if it were a de facto arrangement that did not
give the impression of an increase in radio presence. This could be the
subject of further consultation with the Embassy.
Von Dohnanyi reacted somewhat negatively to the proposed shift.
He agreed it had advantages from a management perspective but, more
importantly, felt it ran counter to Schmidt’s desire to reduce the Radio’s
presence in the FRG. The matter would have to be closely examined
and his preliminary reaction was not favorable. At Von Dohnanyi’s
request, Gronouski agreed to postpone BIB action on the matter until
the FRG had had an opportunity to review it.
Comment: As noted above, Von Dohnanyi does not have line
responsibility for Radio affairs. End comment.
5. RFE/RL accreditation to Olympic Games: Meyer-Landrut asked
about the status of Radio accreditation to the Moscow Games. He noted
that this was a matter of public discussion here and suggested that a
pooling arrangement between VOA and RFE/RL might be successful
in meeting Soviet objections. Gronouski replied that this was one of
many ways in which the issue might be handled. It was, in any case,
important that the Radios have the right to be present in Moscow. The
Olympics were an international, non-political event and RFE/RL as a
serious, professional broadcasting organization must be permitted to
take part in their coverage. Gronouski noted that Deutsche Welle might
also have problems and that a joint position prior to the IOC meeting
in Athens might be helpful to both stations. Meyer-Landrut indicated
this might be worth pursuing though he made no commitment.
6. Name change: Meyer-Landrut, during an office meeting with
Gronouski and again more forcefully at a social occasion, suggested
that a change in the name of the Radios might be beneficial. More
neutral nomenclature would sit well with Western critics and would
also be helpful to the Poles who apparently jammed broadcasts only
under Soviet pressure. It might also be useful to non-jamming countries
such as Hungary and Romania in dealing with Moscow on this issue.
Gronouski responded that some thought had been given to a name
change and the matter might well be further explored. We would,

Radio Free Europe, Radio Liberty, VOA
however, want some informal indication from the East that a change
would produce a favorable reaction.
7. Jamming: In response to a question from Roberts, Meyer-Landrut
said he did not anticipate concrete results on jamming to emerge from
the CSCE follow-on. It was, however, important to build up pressure
from within against Eastern European countries which engaged in
jamming. Roberts agreed and suggested the possibility of coordinated
action in Belgrade to exert more pressure. Meyer-Landrut was non-
commital.
8. Program content: Throughout discussions Gronouski stressed
interest in being informed by FRG of any broadcasts of political concern
to them. In this connection, Meyer-Landrut observed that the FRG’s
own review of RFE/RL’s broadcasts had unearthed nothing objection-
able. Gronouski noted that BIB monitors programs and reviews fre-
quent monitoring reports from Embassies in broadcast areas. Tapes of
all broadcasts were available and could be reviewed upon request.
FRG officials expressed appreciation for offer and for Gronouski’s oft-
repeated concern that broadcast content not be problem for FRG.
9. Suggestion of VOA–RFE/RL merger: Ruhfus, in a reference to
Schmidt’s sensitivities regarding Radios, offered “personal view” that
merger of VOA and RFE/RL could alleviate some of FRG’s concerns.
VOA was official US organ and in view of close US–FRG relationship
its presence in Germany, along with that of RFE/RL, could be more
easily justified vis-a-vis Eastern European critics.
10. On two occasions, FRG officials raised the question of the long-
wave frequency being handled in one package. Gronouski noted that
the longwave frequency fell outside BIB’s responsibilities.
11. This message approved by Chairman Gronouski.
Stoessel

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
56.
Telegram From the Embassy in the Federal Republic of
Germany to the Department of State1
9678. Subject: RFE/RL: Holzkirchen Modernization. Ref: (A) Bonn
1. Chancellor Schmidt has approved the Holzkirchen moderniza-
tion application.
2. The Foreign Office (Joetze) informally and privately advised us
on May 26 that Schmidt had approved the full Holzkirchen moderniza-
tion request as well as the new license reflecting the amalgamation of
RFE/RL. Joetze noted that he was giving us informal working level
notification and that formal notice would likely come next week. Con-
tinuing, he said the decision had not been easy for the Chancellor. In
view of what he described as the Chancellor’s sensitivities on this
matter and the fact that we had not yet been formally advised of
approval, Joetze strongly suggested that the President not refer to this
decision during his meeting with Schmidt.3 While he did not rule out
the possibility that Schmidt himself would advise the President of his
decision, he thought it highly desirable that initial reference to the
approval not come from the US side.4
Stoessel
Confidential; Immediate; Exdis. Sent for information to Munich.
level at the Chancellery was preparing a positive recommendation to the Chancellor for
approval of the U.S. Government application. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
that the Foreign Office had recommended approval of the full U.S. Government Holz-
kirchen modernization application to the Chancellery. (National Archives, RG 59, Central
Foreign Policy File, D780166–0296)
3 Schmidt visited Washington for the meeting of the North Atlantic Council May
4 On June 9, State Secretary Van Well formally notified the Embassy in Bonn that
the West German Government gave final approval to the U.S. Government application.
File, D780242–0241)

Radio Free Europe, Radio Liberty, VOA
57.
Memorandum From Paul Henze of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, July 28, 1978
SUBJECT
RFE/RL and Budget Cuts
I gave you a brief report (in an evening report) last week on OMB
pressures which seem to be building up against RFE/RL.2 I now have
some documentation and the results of extensive discussion of this
problem with John Gronouski and Glenn Ferguson at lunch on 26 July.
As you would expect, they are very concerned. They regard OMB as
prejudiced against the radios and inclined to take only its own counsel
on policy considerations. The report of Glenn Ferguson’s meeting with
substance to these contentions; note the paragraphs marked in red on
page 2, where OMB advocates cutting out of minority languages and
the comments about bargaining off the radios to promote better
relations with the USSR.
The same day that Ferguson was meeting with OMB, Ralph Walter
was writing to me from Munich on the budget problem. His letter is
attached at TAB B4 with the most important passages marked in red.
He sees a budget-cutting exercise as completely out of harmony with
the positive thrust we have built up in the radios during the past 18
months and estimates that it will do serious, fundamental harm. He
maintains that cutting the radios’ budget is absurd, in light of the small
amount of money involved, at a time when we are trying to make
fundamental, long-term improvements in the radios and when the
Sent for action. Bartholomew and Inderfurth both initialed the memorandum indicating
they saw it. Brzezinski checked his approval of all 5 suggestions, subject to marginalia
comments noted below.
2 In a July 21 Evening Report to Brzezinski, Henze wrote that Ferguson was told
“OMB was recommending to President that broadcasts in non-minority languages be
severely curtailed, that RL as a whole be considered as potential trade-off to Soviets for
better behavior and that OMB expects tighter budgets for RFE/RL for future years!”
Henze commented: “Something is badly out of phase here—as I said to Ferguson; these
views go directly contrary to your views and to the net weight of almost all SCC and
Presidential decisions regarding Soviets in recent weeks.” (Carter Library, National
3 Tab A is not attached.
4 Tab B is not attached.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
need for them is obvious in view of heightening tensions within the
Soviet Bloc and heightening tensions in our own relations with the
Soviets.
Chto delat’?5—Gronouski and Ferguson understand the need to
work rapidly to build up more active and solid support for the radios
in Congress. So does Jan Nowak, who is working wisely and well on
this objective. Within the executive branch we need to call OMB to
heel. The idea of cutting out nationality broadcasts at the very point
when we are working to develop a long-range program for increased
U.S. Government attention to this field is incongruous. I suggest we
take a number of steps, systematically, to persuade/press OMB to be
less arbitrary in its approach to radio budgeting. The best defense is
to go on the offensive; I suggest:
• As part of our current Soviet nationalities exercise in the SCC
we should get strong endorsement6 for the concept of expanding broad-
casting to non-Russians, expanding research to back it up, and expand-
ing personnel so that all these tasks can be performed effectively and
sustained over time.
That we arrange for the BIB to prepare strong documentation
on the policy significance of the radios, drawing on State and our own
staff as sources of policy guidance, and authorize them to present this
as justification for increased budgetary requests for FY 1980 and further
increases in subsequent years.
That you speak to McIntyre on the importance of the radios,
getting backing from the President if you consider it desirable.7
That I have a formal session with key senior staffers of OMB
sometime in September, before the 1980 budgetary process goes into
the home stretch, to brief them on our approach to the radios and the
policy importance we attach to them.
• That we supplement what is being done in respect to Congress
by BIB, by the radios and by Jan Nowak and others, by discreet efforts
of our own.
5 “What to do?”
6 Brzezinski underlined “strong endorsement” and wrote in the margin “from
whom?” An unidentified staff member (possibly Bartholomew or Inderfurth) answered
by writing “SCC.”
7 Brzezinski wrote “give me a brief” in the margin below this recommendation.

Radio Free Europe, Radio Liberty, VOA
58.
Intelligence Information Special Report Prepared in the
Central Intelligence Agency1
Washington, September 21, 1978
COUNTRY
Romania
DATE OF INFO
April 1978 to July 1978
SUBJECT
Efforts by Romanian President Ceausescu to Damage or Undermine Radio Free
Europe
SOURCE
[1 paragraph (4 lines) not declassified]
1. Romanian President Ceausescu, on returning from his trip to
the United States on 18 April 1978, during which Radio Free Europe
(RFE) infuriated him by coverage that included live broadcasts of the
playing of an outdated Romanian anthem and a press conference dur-
ing which Ceausescu was required to deal with facts that had been
kept hidden from the Romanian people, ordered that the Directorate
General of Foreign Intelligence (DGIE) draw up a study of the occasions
on which RFE had presented the Romanian Government and especially
Ceausescu in an unfavorable light. The study was to deal also with
methods used by RFE for collecting information (as RFE data were
often very timely and accurate) and with the role played in the process
by the American and West German Embassies [in Romania].2 The study
would serve as a basis for lodging a protest to the United States at
some time in the future. Ceausescu asked at the same time for talking
points that might be used with West German Chancellor Helmut
Schmidt, President Walter Scheel and Chairman of Social Democratic
Party Willy Brandt in asking that RFE be compelled to quit the territory
of West Germany. Some of these points, he added might be useful in
Paris, where, he added, there was special need to put an end to the
I–026, Subject Files F–R, Romania. Secret; [handling restriction not declassified]. Henze
forwarded the report to Brzezinski under a September 22 covering memorandum. In
his memorandum, Henze noted that in August, Noel Bernard, Romanian Bureau director
at Radio Free Europe, was invited to visit Romania, and that the RFE leadership sought
approval for the visit. In light of the report, Henze recommended that Bernard’s visit
be indefinitely postponed. Brzezinski approved the recommendation.
2 These and following brackets are in the original.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
broadcasts by RFE commentators Monica Lovinescu and Virgiliu Ier-
unca. Perhaps he would go on to ask the Spanish Premier and Portu-
guese President that the relay stations in those countries be dismantled.
An entire diplomatic campaign was not to be excluded, he said. (Source
Comment: The importance that Ceausescu and the Romanian Govern-
ment attach to RFE is reflected in the fact that a daily bulletin on RFE
content is prepared by AGERPRES; Ceausescu receives one of the
dozen copies made of the bulletin.)
2. Ceausescu after reflection levied additional requirements for the
campaign against RFE. Suggestions were needed, he declared to Source,
for luring one or more RFE employees to Romania with the idea that
on their return home they would denounce RFE as a tool of the United
States and the CIA. But while working to discredit RFE Ceausescu
wanted to make simultaneous efforts to influence RFE to take a softer
line toward Romania. Ceausescu suggested that it might be feasible to
organize a roundtable discussion between RFE staffers and true-blue
(meaning DGIE-directed) Romanian intellectuals in the hope that RFE
would begin to look with more sympathy on Romanian activities.
3. According to General Alexandru Danescu, Deputy Minister of
Interior, an opening for practicing suasion occurred in early July 1978
when a sportswriter (name unknown) for Romanian TV on his return
from a trip to Germany came to Danescu to say that in Germany he
had met Noel Bernard, RFE Romanian Desk Chief, whose wife he had
known in the past. Bernard had mentioned to the journalist his interest
in making a trip to Romania, in whatever guise—official or not, with
public announcement or not, even using another name. Foreign Minis-
ter Stefan Andrei was advised, and the matter was discussed by
Danescu and Andrei with Ceausescu, who said that the journalist
should be sent back to Germany to tell Bernard that he had learned
that the Foreign Ministry concurred in Bernard’s visit and that if Ber-
nard would tell him when he intended to come and in what manner
the journalist would arrange the rest of the trip with the Foreign Minis-
try. The journalist was to return to Germany in August and it was
hoped that the Bernard trip would take place at an early date. Events
since then are not known.
4. RFE coverage has also stirred Ceausescu to violence in the past.
According to First Deputy Minister of the Interior Nicolae Doicaru, at
least two actions were ordered in Paris. One concerned a man named
[Serban] Stefanescu, who had been given permission to emigrate from
Romania after having walked in front of the Intercontinental Hotel in
Bucharest carrying placards denouncing Ceausescu; the President on
being informed said that a man that foolish could only be stopped by
killing him, so it was easier to kick him out of the country. On reaching
France, however, Stefanescu began demonstrating in front of the

Radio Free Europe, Radio Liberty, VOA
Romanian Embassy for his mother to be allowed to depart Romania.
When RFE began to carry items concerning the case, Ceausescu became
indignant and ordered Doicaru to have Stefanescu put out of action,
repeating his standard admonition that the man should not be killed
and that the perpetrators should not appear to be Romanians. Two
men were dispatched to Paris. Stefanescu’s habits were observed, with
the decision being made to grab the man and throw him down a subway
stairwell that he passed daily. This was in fact done and Stefanescu
was not heard from again.
5. The other Paris case Source heard about from Doicaru involved
Monica Lovinescu, the commentator (mentioned in Paragraph One
above) whom Ceausescu was still trying to silence as of spring 1978.
Lovinescu’s sin was to concentrate her criticism on Ceausescu, a tactic
that always evoked a strong reaction from him. He earlier ordered
Doicaru to harm her physically. Doicaru on this occasion used two
Arabs. [In November 1977] they entered her apartment, a struggle
ensued and Lovinescu fell to the floor in a way that made the assailants
think she was dead. They fled. Ceausescu berated Doicaru for the
laxness of the operation when Lovinescu came back on the air.
6. On an earlier occasion, Doicaru said that Ceausescu had given
indications of how to deal with one of his most acid critics at RFE in
Munich, Emil Georgescu. Ceausescu said the man’s teeth should be
knocked out so that he could not speak on the radio and that this could
perhaps best be done with a traffic accident. Doicaru used the two
men who had proved their mettle with Stefanescu. They went to Mu-
nich, studied Georgescu’s movements, left for Austria to rent two cars
with alias documents, and then returned to Munich to await Georgescu
at a curve previously selected. One of the cars was used to ram Geor-
gescu, and the other to flee the scene. Georgescu did not speak on RFE
for four months after that. Although RFE had mentioned the accidents
that had befallen Stefanescu and Lovinescu, nothing was said about
Georgescu’s accident. Ceausescu declared his pleasure to Doicaru. The
incident had a sequel. Georgescu’s wife not long thereafter called her
mother in Romania and said that Georgescu had been hurt in an acci-
dent caused by Romania but that this was the wrong tactic; he might
stop his broadcasts in return for something like granting his mother-
in-law permission to leave the country but he would not be deterred
by threats to himself. The call was intercepted and Ceausescu was
advised. Let her go, he ordered, and the mother-in-law was told she
was being put through by phone to Munich to announce her imminent
arrival. Georgescu subsequently turned to practicing law.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
59.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to the Director of the Office of
Management and Budget (McIntyre)1
Washington, September 22, 1978
SUBJECT
RFE/RL FY 1980 Budget
The Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty (RFE/RL) broadcasting
operation, which is funded through the Board for International Broad-
casting (BIB), is a key instrument for implementing our policies toward
the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe, an important element in the
President’s human rights program and a symbol of the permanent
American commitment to free flow of information and ideas.
RFE/RL suffered in the early 1970’s from mismanagement and
declining technical effectiveness. When the President approved 11 new
250–KW transmitters for this operation in March 1977, the basis was
provided for a process of technical modernization and rejuvenation
which has gained steady momentum. Germany recently gave approval
for construction of four of the new transmitters and plans for construc-
tion of seven in Portugal have already been developed. We were lucky
this year in being able to fill senior management positions in Munich
with outstanding men (Ferguson and Walter) who are working harmo-
niously with John Gronouski, BIB Chairman, who gives an enormous
amount of his time and energy to this job.
By the time the new transmitters are ready to go on the air in 1981,
these men expect to have created:
• A vigorous broadcasting staff with a preponderance of new,
young people
• Expanded research in support of broadcasts
• More efficient and rational administration, and
• Modernized studio and programming techniques.
The new transmitters will double the power of RFE/RL; other
improvements should double the effectiveness.
One special aspect of this effort derives from the fact that the SCC
recently approved a broad program for increasing U.S. Government
Drafted by Henze and forwarded to Brzezinski for signature under a September 19
covering memorandum together with a detailed brief on the RFE/RL FY 1980 budget.
(Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File,
Subject Chron File, Box 112, Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty/Voice of America: 1978)

Radio Free Europe, Radio Liberty, VOA
knowledge of the non-Russian peoples of the Soviet Union whose rapid
rate of population increase will soon make them the majority. RFE/
RL has a unique capacity to contribute in this area and one of our
objectives is to improve both research and broadcasting by recruiting
more young people of non-Russian nationalities and training them well.
I know that Gronouski and Ferguson have been explaining their
approach to your senior staff and making a strong case for the modest
budget increases they feel they need in FY 1980 if we are to get full
value out of the increased transmitter power of RFE/RL. This operation
has been in existence for a long time, but it should not be looked upon
as a routine feature of our foreign information program. I am satisfied
that the BIB, under Gronouski, is doing a more careful job than ever
before of examining broadcasting requirements. What the BIB is asking
enable them to do the job we have set for them.
Zbigniew Brzezinski
60.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to the Director of the Office of
Management and Budget (McIntyre)1
Washington, December 1, 1978
SUBJECT
BIB (RFE/RL) FY 1980 Budget Request
In reference to your Overview summary of the Foreign Information
and Exchange portion of the FY 1980 Budget (as well as BIB Chairman
John Gronouski’s letter to you of November 16, 1978 commenting on
your office’s proposals for reduction in the BIB’s budget request), I am
disturbed by the concluding statement on page 3 of the Overview
which states:
marking. The closing is handwritten. Henze forwarded a draft to Brzezinski under a
November 30 covering memorandum and commented: “OMB did its detailed homework
sloppily, cutting positions that had already been eliminated and misreading amounts
requested for travel, recruitment and training of new personnel and certain other items.”
He concluded: “OMB has recommended cutting the very items most needed to enable
the reorganization of RFE/RL to be effective.” (Ibid.)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
“The above ranking reflects the Division’s belief that activities of
ICA, which are designed to build long-term mutual relationships
worldwide, are more important and represent a better investment than
BIB activities which are unilateral and geographically limited.”
This is not a valid reflection of the Administration’s policy toward
ICA and BIB operations. They are not competitive but complementary.
BIB requests should not be subjected to sharper reductions than those
of ICA. Major elements in the BIB are sums for non-recurring staff
rejuvenation, funds for program improvement, for acquisition of AP
news service and for money which the President approved in March
1977 and which is now well underway.
I hope you and your colleagues will take the foregoing into consid-
eration as you review the budgets of the above.
Regards,
Zbigniew Brzezinski
61.
Memorandum From Paul Henze of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, February 6, 1979
SUBJECT
The President’s Comments on Persian-language Broadcasting and
Related Issues (U)
The President’s impatience as expressed in his comments on
Vance’s report that Persian-language broadcasting (Tab B)2 will be
Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 112, Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty/Voice of
ton, Funk, Odom, and Ermarth. Bartholomew and Inderfurth initialed the memorandum,
indicating they saw it.
2 Attached but not printed. Newsom met with ICA and VOA to discuss the need
to strengthen broadcasting to Iran in response to both the Shah’s recent departure and
an increase in Soviet propaganda broadcasting to the region. Inderfurth informed Sick
and Henze on February 5 that, in a February 2 Evening Report to Carter, Vance informed
the President of the discussions and of ICA’s plan to begin Persian broadcasting “in
about six weeks.” The President, Inderfurth noted, responded: “We should have prepared
for this 3–4 months ago—make this SOP in the future.” The memorandum asked Sick
and Henze to follow up on the Presidential comment. (Carter Library, National Security

Radio Free Europe, Radio Liberty, VOA
started by VOA “in about six weeks” is understandable, but the Presi-
dent is unrealistic in his expectation that we would be much better off
if we had started preparations for these broadcasts “3–4 months ago.”
Effective foreign-language broadcasting requires two essentials: a good,
trained staff and an audience. The creation of these essentials requires
a great deal more time than 3–4 months. Three or four years is more
likely to be the optimum time for such an accomplishment. (C)
It is better to be late with Persian-language broadcasts than to go
on having none at all, but we must not expect rapid impact. With all
the disparate tendencies and confusion evident among Iranians today,
it will not be easy for VOA to organize a good staff. VOA’s basic
guidelines will not permit very exciting broadcasting or much attention
to internal Iranian developments. The Iranian audience already has a
rich selection of Soviet regular and clandestine broadcasts in Persian,
Azerbaijani and Kurdish and BBC has long had a reputation for reliabil-
ity and relevance among Iranians who want more objective news. VOA
broadcasts in Persian will be entering a crowded spectrum with far
less power than the Russians use. (I did a good deal of short-wave
listening during my recent visit to Turkey—getting VOA or BBC in any
language, even in English on which both services put major emphasis,
is difficult; the new Moscow English-language service, in impeccable
BBC accents, booms in over the whole area.) (C)
Ken Giddens, Director of the VOA 1969–77, tells me that he under-
took a campaign to inaugurate Persian-language broadcasts in the early
1970’s but was overruled by State policy people and OMB budget-
cutters. We have short-changed our international broadcasting opera-
tions for years. The President’s approval early in this Administration
of a transmitter expansion program for VOA and RFE/RL was a good
initiative but we must not deceive ourselves about it: it only enables
us to make up part of the lag that resulted from several years of neglect.
We are still lagging and, unless we launch a new transmitter-building
program soon, we will be in a worse predicament vis-a-vis the Soviets
by the late 1980’s than we are in the late 1970’s. Meanwhile our efforts
to rejuvenate staffs and make broadcasts more effective have been
slowed by budgetary parsimony as well as reorganizations and mana-
gerial problems. (U)
I suggest we capitalize on the President’s concern to task ICA and
State with a review of language-priorities and potential troublespots
where we might in coming years find ourselves in the same predica-
ment as we do in Iran now. I suggest we also seize this opportunity
to start what Congress may in any case task the Administration with
doing this year: surveying transmitter needs for the mid-1980’s and
beyond and developing plans to meet them. I attach a memorandum
from you to Reinhardt and Vance. (C)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
RECOMMENDATIONS:
A. That you sign the memorandum at Tab A to Reinhardt3 and
B. That you brief the President on the realities of the challenge we
face in international broadcasting.4 (C)
3 The memorandum was retyped to address only ICA Director Reinhardt. In a
February 9 memorandum, Brzezinski asked Reinhardt to undertake a review of program-
ming and resource allocation and report his finding by March 7; he also asked that
transmitter needs for the next decade be reviewed and a proposal submitted by May
4 Inderfurth circled “the challenge we face in international broadcasting” and wrote
“ZB, If you sign the memo at Tab A—which is a good initiative—I will write an appropriate
DR item for the President. Rick.”
62.
Memorandum From Paul Henze of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, May 4, 1979
SUBJECT
Tensions between RFE/RL and BIB (C)
The calm and good sense which have characterized the relationship
between BIB and RFE/RL was too good to last. It has been disrupted
by a new bout of scheming by the BIB Staff in which Gronouski,
unfortunately, has let himself become entangled. (C)
You will recall that Glenn Ferguson some time ago named Bill
Buell Vice President in charge of the radios’ Washington Office with
the aim of having him concentrate on congressional relations. Though
this action was taken in consultation with, and with the blessing
of, Gronouski, it was resented by Walter Roberts and his staff. Buell
arrived here from Munich a couple of weeks ago and took up his
Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 112, Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty/Voice of
memorandum: “I never seen an outfit in which there is more stupid infighting. I’m
getting tired of it. ZB.”

Radio Free Europe, Radio Liberty, VOA
duties. When the BIB met last week the Staff introduced a new draft
regulation which requires that any radio contact with Congressmen
or Congressional staffs must be cleared in advance with the BIB
Staff Director—i.e. Walter Roberts. Gronouski supported the draft
but proposed it be studied with implementation to be deferred until
the BIB meets again in the summer. Ferguson, Walter and Buell are
angered by the regulation and by the way it was introduced. They
feel Gronouski has been hoodwinked by Walter Roberts, Tony Shub,
Testifying before the SFRC last week on the radios’ FY 1980 budget,
Ferguson and his team found themselves confronted by an extraordi-
nary set of detailed operational questions, some of them of a why-
haven’t-you-stopped-beating-your-wife nature which they feel had to
have been planted with the Committee Staff by the BIB. (C)
Ferguson called me from New York this afternoon to tell me how
upset he is about all this and these same problems (including a good
deal more detail) were the main topic of Bill Buell’s personal visit to
me this afternoon. (C)
I am surprised that Gronouski would let himself be manipulated
by Walter Roberts into causing strained relations with Glenn Ferguson
and his team—who are by far the best management group the radios
have ever had in their entire existence. And as you and I know well
(you emphasized this point in your meeting with Ferguson last June),
one of the most important things the radios can do to strengthen
themselves is to expand relations with key Congressmen and Senators
and gain understanding there. That they are setting out to do this with
a clear sense of purpose and a good chance of success is what disturbs
the petty bureaucratic mind of Walter Roberts. (C)
I plan to call Gronouski and express concern that the problem
has arisen. I hope I can gently talk him out of going ahead with
this draft “regulation”. If not, I plan to talk more frankly to him
about the unwisdom of letting Walter Roberts harass the competent
management we have succeeded in getting into the radios (and it
has been your and my doing, as much as anybody’s!) and the need
to find other employment for Roberts if he cannot desist from his
petty intriguing. One of the most serious aspects of these strains is
that so much suspicion and bad blood is developing between Roberts
and the Ferguson-Walter-Buell team that it may never be possible
to overcome it. (C)
In any case, we simply cannot permit the radios—which have been
restored to a remarkable condition of good health—to be reduced by
the BIB Staff into a Byzantine mess again. . . In the longer perspective,
what all this proves is that the BIB and its Staff are themselves a largely
unnecessary layer of management and oversight. When we have built

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
up solid congressional backing, we should move to have them elimi-
nated, relying to the radios’ long-established corporate and manage-
ment structure as sufficient. (C)
63.
Letter From Paul Henze of the National Security Council
Staff to the Director of the International Communication
Agency (Reinhardt)1
Washington, June 13, 1979
Dear John,
Since the pressure of SALT and summits has prevented him from
doing so, Zbig has asked me to give you our reactions to the two
excellent studies you prepared in response to his request of February
they present. Let me sum up our conclusions. (U)
We find your recommendations for technical expansion of VOA
during the 1980’s reasonable and justified in terms of basic foreign
policy priorities.3 We endorse them fully. We would like to see you
incorporate these plans in your budget projections for FY 1981 and
beyond. The political issues involved in setting up new transmitters
for broadcasting to south and central Asia should be systematically
assessed as soon as possible so that negotiations can get under way
and serious technical preparations can begin. Please assess these ques-
Vance and McIntyre. In a June 1 memorandum to Brzezinski, Henze outlined the VOA
position on language allocation and transmitter needs and recommended that the ICA
proposals be approved. (Ibid.) On June 5, Robert Gates returned the June 1 memorandum
to Henze and suggested that, given Brzezinski’s prior approval of guidelines on VOA,
he deal directly on those issues with Reinhardt. (Ibid.)
outlined VOA language priorities. Tarnoff wrote to Brzezinski on March 24 that the
Department of State agreed with the position adopted by ICA on expanding VOA
language broadcasting with the exception of expanding Mongolian programming since
“Russian broadcasts to the Soviet Far East remain an effective means of reaching the
Mongolian population.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material,
dum to Brzezinski, Reinhardt forwarded the requested VOA transmitter study, including
recommendations for building additional transmitters. (Ibid.)
3 An updated version of these proposals were discussed at an SCC (I) meeting on
December 11. See Document 70.

Radio Free Europe, Radio Liberty, VOA
tions with the help of the Department of State and give us a status
report by September 1, 1979. (C)
We find your conclusions in respect to expansion of broadcasting
time and broadcasting staff realistic and recommend you also provide
in current budget planning for the modest expenditures this expansion
will entail over the next two or three years. (U)
On language priorities, we welcome your plans for further expan-
sion of the Persian service which you have recently inaugurated. Atten-
tion should be given to the need to adjust broadcasting hours to
improve prospects of attracting an optimum audience in Afghanistan
and Soviet Central Asia as well as in Iran itself. (C)
In respect to new languages, we concur in the priority of Azeri,
but as next priorities we propose Amharic, Pushtu and Tamil rather
than Mongolian and Lingala. The potential audience for Mongolian
seems too small. Broadcasts in Lingala would undoubtedly be useful
but the need for better communication with Ethiopia, where Soviet
influence is continually becoming more predominant, is greater. (C)
We have noted from your current broadcast schedule that VOA is
still beaming 35 hours per week to the three countries of Indo-China,
with 64 million people, while only 21 hours per week go to the whole
Indian subcontinent, with a population between 800–900 million. I
should think there would be a case for reducing broadcast time in
Vietnamese, if necessary, to permit more broadcasting in the native
languages of the Indian subcontinent. Exactly what mix of Indian lan-
guages would be best should separately be evaluated but we clearly
ought to do more than we are now doing. (C)
I will be happy to meet with you and your staff to discuss any of
these plans further.4 (U)
Very sincerely,
Paul B. Henze
4 Reinhardt responded on June 21, suggesting that the ICA would proceed with
the NSC suggestions. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
64.
Memorandum From Paul Henze of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, August 15, 1979
SUBJECT
VOA Expansion (U)
You will recall that we directed VOA to re-examine its language
priorities and readjust its output to support basic U.S. foreign policy
objectives a few months ago. Tom Tuch, deputy director of VOA, have
me a brief rundown today of where things stand. Persian-language
broadcasts were resumed in April and now go out ½ hour2 of original
programming per day. There is not much evidence of impact yet in
either Iran or Afghanistan. An additional hour of Persian will be added
this winter. In addition, additional resources are being allocated to
Chinese-language broadcasting and an hour of English to the Caribbean
is being added during FY 1980. (C)
Next priority is Azeri, but it is being put off until 1981 because of
budgetary stringency. Cost of adding Azeri (with impact in both Iran
and USSR) is $250,000 per year and 8 slots. ICA says it cannot reprogram
during FY 1980 to do this. (C)
In light of what we know the Soviets are doing in the area immedi-
ately to the south of their borders, we seem to be going at expanding
our own impact in a very leisurely way. If all we need is $250,000 to
start Azeri, it seems to me it would be very much in our national
interest to do it. We also need to push VOA into doing something
about building new and more powerful transmitters in the South Asian
area (approved in March 1977), for whatever they are programming,
their signal is weak and they are not competing with the vastly more
powerful broadcasts out of the USSR. (C)
At some point, it seems to me, we need to make the effort to get
a little more zip and pep into this whole effort. But the present time
may not be opportune. (U)
I stand ready to propose ways of raising these issues whenever
you want them raised. What is your advice?—
LET IT RIDE
Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 112, Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty/Voice of
2 DavidAaroncircled“½hour”and wrote “ridiculous!” at the top ofthe memorandum.

Radio Free Europe, Radio Liberty, VOA
Generate a Proposal for finding MONEY for Azeri sooner
PUSH the transmitter problem
TELL VOA/ICA to be more adventuresome in seeking extra
funds
(C)5
3 David Aaron approved the recommendation.
4 David Aaron approved the recommendation.
5 David Aaron approved the recommendation. He added a handwritten comment
at the bottom of the page: “Also push and above all Persian facilities. DA.”
65.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, September 7, 1979
SUBJECT
Soviet Propaganda Broadcasting (U)
CIA has recently put more effort into studying Soviet propaganda
radio. Here are some of the results. There has been an enormous increase
in recentyears inboth quantityandqualityof broadcasts andtransmitter
power. Soviet stations, e.g., broadcast 62 hours per week to the Arab
world. An improved English-language service, which deliberately imi-
tates the BBC, blankets the whole eastern hemisphere with transmitter
strengthmuchgreaterthanVOAorBBC.Byrelayingbroadcaststhrough
Cuba,theSovietshaveadded55hoursaweektotheirpreviousschedules
in Spanish, Portuguese, Arabic and English. Most interesting, perhaps,
are the changes they have made in clandestine broadcasts. They have
dropped broadcasts in Spanish, Italian and German to concentrate on
Turkey and Iran. Two stations broadcasting to Turkey have increased
Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 112, Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty/Voice of
indicating he saw it. In an August 15 memorandum to Brzezinski, Henze reported that,
at his request, the CIA had undertaken a study of Soviet clandestine broadcasting.
Henze recommended that Brzezinski inform the President of the conclusions of the
memorandum to underscore the importance of strengthening RFE/RL and VOA broad-
casting. Brzezinski asked Henze to draft a memorandum for the President. Henze for-
warded the draft to Brzezinski for signature on September 5. (Ibid.)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
their transmission time twice during the past year and a half: in February
1978andagaininJune1979.Bothputoutahighlyagitational,anti-Amer-
ican line. The main Soviet clandestine station directed at Iran continues
the same mendacious, inflammatory commentary that exacerbated the
situation there last winter, broadcasting in both Persian and Azerbaijani.
It probably uses the same transmitters as Radio Baku, which also broad-
casts in Kurdish. Another Soviet-backed station transmitting from Libya
to Iran echoes similar agitational themes. The Soviets also seem to have a
hand in several clandestine stations in Arabic that broadcast from places
such as Aden. (C)
In view of the continuing expansion and intensification of Soviet
broadcasting efforts, we need to consider further expansion of our own.
Given the modest costs, it is money well spent. Both VOA and RFE/
RL are preparing proposals for more broadcasts directed at the Middle
East and the Muslim areas of the Soviet Union. (C)
66.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to the Director of the
International Communication Agency (Reinhardt)1
Washington, October 1, 1979
SUBJECT
Broadcasts to USSR and Eastern Europe (U)
In my view, one of the most important themes that we should
be conveying to VOA audiences in the USSR and Eastern Europe,
particularly at this time when there is considerable focus on Soviet/
Cuban activities throughout the world, is the fact that the resources
spent by the Soviets in Cuba, Vietnam and elsewhere are coming right
out of the pockets of consumers in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe.
Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 112, Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty/Voice of
ment reported that Ambassador Dick Davis, who was running a task force looking at
overseas reporting, told him that the U.S. Government was “not doing nearly enough
to get across to our VOA audiences in the USSR and Eastern Europe that the dollars
spent by the Soviets in Cuba, Vietnam, and elsewhere are coming out of the pockets of
Soviet and Eastern European consumers.” Brzezinski marked the paragraph and wrote
in the margin “Give me a clear tasking memo to ICA.” (Ibid.) Brement forwarded a
draft to Brzezinski on September 29. (Ibid.)

Radio Free Europe, Radio Liberty, VOA
For example, Moscow provides petroleum to Havana at a substantial
discount and pays the Cubans five times the world price for sugar.
The net effect is a direct lowering of the standard of living of Soviet
citizens.2 (C)
I believe that for foreign policy reasons it is very important to get
this message across to your many VOA listeners, and would therefore
appreciate receiving, by c.o.b. October 5, assurances from ICA that this
theme is being given the attention it deserves in your broadcasts. (U)
Zbigniew Brzezinski
2 On October 12, Brement notified Brzezinski that Reinhardt had not yet responded
to his October 1 memorandum and suggested a follow-up reminder. In an October 15
memorandum to Reinhardt, Aaron added that the NSC had received “a reliable intelli-
gence report stating that many Soviet citizens in high positions within the Party were
‘griping about Soviet foreign aid and foreign involvement’” and “resent it for what they
see as its negative impact on the quality of life in the USSR.” (Ibid.)
67.
Editorial Note
On November 14, 1979, the Department of State sent telegrams
to Bonn, Moscow, and all Eastern European posts regarding recent
discussion on Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty asset relocation
from Europe to the United States. The Board for International
Broadcasting authorization bill for fiscal year 1980 had been amended
in the Senate to require the Board to study possible relocation of
scenarios. The Department informed the posts of the conclusions of
the Board’s study. The 50 percent scenario, the Board concluded,
would be “severely damaging to the unique character of RFE/RL”
and would be particularly true for the Eastern European language
services. The Board found even a 25 percent scenario, in which the
Eastern European services would be moved to the United States,
prohibitively damaging to the quality of programming, as “these
services are most dependant on close interaction with their audi-
ences.” A 25 percent scenario in which Radio Liberty would be
moved to the United States was found to undo programmatic gains
achieved by the ongoing consolidation of the two Radios. Finally,
a 10 percent scenario in which part of Radio Liberty—either the

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
Russian or the other nationalities sections of Radio Liberty—would
be moved to the United States was found by the Board to be “totally
unacceptable” in separating “from one another the broadcasters in
various languages to a single country (the U.S.S.R.).” The Board for
International Broadcasting study concluded: “While recommending
against relocation models based on arbitrary percentages, it is the
Board’s judgment that financial savings could be realized, and RFE/
RL programming enriched, by a program-oriented reallocation of
resources.” Carried out on a voluntary basis, this reallocation would
restore balance in programming and “improve the quality and
diversity of RFE/RL programming.” (Telegram 296198 to multiple
posts, November 14; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
Policy File, D790525–0156)
Responding to the Department’s telegram on November 16, the
Embassy in Bucharest stressed that Radio Free Europe was Romania’s
“major source of meaningful information and commentary, not only
on external, but also on internal developments.” (Telegram 7717 from
Bucharest, November 16; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
Policy File, D790527–0825)
The Embassy in Warsaw echoed the same concerns on November
19, stressing that “we consider it essential to keep the Polish broadcast
service in Munich.” The Embassy continued: “Only thus can the ‘Euro-
pean presence,’ and the capability of quick (telephonic) communication
between listeners in Poland and the station be maintained. Eliminating
these operating conditions would, we are convinced, result in a drastic
loss of listener interest and confidence in RFE.” (Telegram 11506 from
Warsaw, November 19; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
Policy File, D790532–0502)
The Embassy in Hungary offered a stark reminder of the effective-
ness of the Radios, writing on November 19: “We have recently been
reminded of the efficacy and value of the Radios in their alert reporting
of a protest by 250 Hungarian intellectuals over the Prague trials.”
The Embassy concluded: “As one of the protesters has told us,
within days ‘everyone in Hungary’ knew of the existence of the
protest from RFE. We should consider carefully before we tamper
with our most effective challenge to the monopoly of Communist
governments over information.” (Telegram 5869 from Budapest,
November 19; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
The Embassies in Moscow and Sofia also emphatically opposed
any relocation. (Telegram 26076 from Moscow, November 20; National
Foreign Policy File, D790535–0915)

Radio Free Europe, Radio Liberty, VOA
From Prague, the Embassy summed up frustration felt by posts
with the discussion of relocation of the Radios: “The question is, since
the USG has developed an efficient and influential voice in Eastern
Europe and the Soviet Union at a modest cost, why should we contin-
ually study ways to save relatively small amounts of money when the
proposed solutions will all adversely affect the utility of that rather
valuable resource?” (Telegram 4057 from Prague, November 20;
Strongly recommending against moving the Radios, the Embassy
in Bonn stressed that “implementation of any kind of relocation plan
beyond transfer of a few low-level positions would stir political contro-
versy in the FRG, with ensuing tensions in FRG–US relations.” Any
move—be it complete or partial—would have the same effect, the
Embassy reported in telegram 20671 from Bonn, November 19. Reloca-
tion would open Schmidt to attack from the right for abandoning the
Radios, as well as from the left by Social Democratic Party elements
seeking to completely remove the Radios from German soil. Without
discussing the financial aspects of the move, the Embassy concluded
“that the negative political implications are so substantial as to throw
considerable weight into the balance.” (National Archives, RG 59, Cen-
tral Foreign Policy File, D790533–0171)
In a November 27 letter to Board for International Broadcasting
Executive Director Walter Roberts, Assistant Secretary of State for
European Affairs George Vest detailed the Department’s position in
the Radio relocation debate: “Our Embassies have concluded that
personnel would have an adverse political and psychological impact
on US interests in the Federal Republic of Germany, the USSR, and
the five Eastern European countries.” Vest also stressed the assessment
of the Embassy in Bonn that relocation would become “a contentious
domestic political issue” in West Germany, and that both Moscow
and Bonn believe any relocation would lead to “intensified Soviet
pressure for the complete removal of the Radios from the Federal
Republic.” The Department of State informed the Embassies in Bonn,
Moscow, and the Eastern European capitals of the text of the letter
in telegram 310750 to multiple posts, December 2. (National Archives,
The Soviet invasion of Afghanistan in December 1979, the ongoing
hostage crisis in Iran, the boycott of the Moscow Olympics, and the
increasing popular unrest in Poland all gave added weight to the
usefulness of the Radios. However, facing financial crisis, Washington
continued the pressure to find budget cuts. On June 25, 1980,
Board for International Broadcasting Chairman Gronouski informed
Secretary of State Edmund Muskie of the Board’s decision to transfer

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
to other places in Western Europe. Gronouski requested Department
guidance with respect to two questions: “A. Would moving the three
Baltic language units to the United States be inconsistent with the
foreign policy interests of the United States? B. Would relocation of
the three Baltic language units to the United States (involving no
more than eighteen of the more than 1000 Munich-based RFE/RL
employees) have adverse political implications in the countries
affected by the move?” The Department asked Bonn, Moscow, and
Eastern European posts for their assessments of the plan. (Telegram
Central Foreign Policy File, D800317–1197)
The Embassy in Moscow responded on July 11, stressing that “the
potential for wedge-driving between the US and the FRG—if the Soviets
should conclude that a partial relocation was being made in response
to German nervousness—is even greater under present circumstances
The Embassy in Bonn concluded that a move of the Baltic services
to the United States would “(1) be inconsistent with our foreign policy
interests in Germany, and (2) would have adverse political implications
The Embassy in Warsaw recommended that the Department weigh
“what appear to be the limited economies available through a move
of the Baltic units against the risk of arousing new apprehensions about
the stations’ ‘withdrawal from Europe’ among a much wider sector of
the RFE/RL audience than that directly affected.” (Telegram 6729 from
File, D800327–1150)

Radio Free Europe, Radio Liberty, VOA
68.
Memorandum From the Director of the International
Communication Agency (Reinhardt) to the President’s
Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, November 26, 1979
SUBJECT
VOA Broadcasting
With reference to your memorandum of November 16,2 we have
undertaken on a priority basis the identification and use of appropriate
additional materials on the treatment of Muslims in the Soviet Union.
The initial focus of our effort, beyond our ongoing news reporting,
will be a special VOA series examining the status of Islam beyond the
Islamic heartland.
This series, to be produced for broadcast in December3 will focus
on the quality of life within minority Islamic communities around the
world. It will be organized around topics such as:
—the size and growth of Islamic communities;
—the degree of Islamic integration into the surrounding cultural,
political and economic environment;
—their sense of freedom and security;
Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 112, Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty/Voice of
under a handwritten note that reads: “I have been pressing VOA for this since early
fall.” Carter initialed the memorandum, indicating he saw it.
2 On November 8, less than a week after the U.S. diplomats were taken hostage in
Tehran, Brzezinski asked the ICA to include in the VOA broadcasts to the Middle East
information about the treatment of Muslims in the Soviet Union including “references
to the Soviet policy actively discouraging religious belief and practice.” Brzezinski also
requested a report to Carter on what VOA was doing along those lines and what
augmentations to VOA programming were being implemented. (Ibid.) In a November
15 memorandum to Brzezinski, Reinhardt reported that ICA was “studying various
approaches to augment present programming and broadcasting.” (Ibid.) On November
16, Brzezinski signed a memorandum to ICA requesting a concrete report for the Presi-
dent, which should be submitted by November 26. (National Security Council, Carter
wrote Reinhardt that the November 26 ICA proposals appeared to have potential and
reemphasized the need to urgently implement VOA programming to Muslims. In a
handwritten note, Brzezinski added that he “needs periodic updates for the President.”
(Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File,
Subject Chron File, Box 112, Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty/Voice of America: 10–
3 Brzezinski underlined “in December” and wrote an exclamation point in the
margin.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
—their right to practice their religion and official and unofficial
restrictions thereon;
—participation in the worldwide Islamic resurgence;
—how they are influenced by urbanism and modernization in
technologically advanced environments;
—the perceptions of these minority Islamic communities held by
their non-Islamic neighbors and similar issues.
Such an approach will be most effective, in our judgment, because:
(a) it will be credible; (b) it will be more than a solitary program; (c)
it will permit us to compare and contrast the treatment of Muslims in
the Soviet Union with their more favorable conditions elsewhere; and
(d) it will provide a format for discussing some aspect of Soviet treat-
ment of the Muslims in each of the programs.
The series will initially consist of eight or more ten-minute pro-
grams. It will be broadcast primarily in languages that reach the Islamic
heartland—e.g., Arabic, Indonesian, Turkish, Persian, Urdu as well as
French and English—but in Uzbek, Serbo-Croatian, Georgian, Chinese,
Swahili, Hausa, Hindi and Tamil as well. We are consulting with a
wide range of authorities to develop material for the instant series;
that research will lead to other VOA program possibilities as well.
Among those to be consulted:
Sheikh Ahmad Zaki, Imam of the Islamic Center of Chicago; Dr.
Muhammed Abdul-Rauf, Director of the Islamic Center Mosque in
Washington, D.C.; Fazl Al-Rahmam, Professor of Islamic Thought, Uni-
versity of Chicago; Professor John Esposito, Professor of Religion, Col-
lege of the Holy Cross, Worcester, Mass.; Professor Jaroslav Stetkevych,
University of Chicago; Dr. Muzammil Siddiqui, Muslim World League;
Imam Khalil Al-Min, World Community of Islam; Imam Muhammed
Hirri, Shiite Imam, Detroit, Michigan; Mr. Leo Orleans, The Library of
Congress; Ms. Kirkland of the University of Chicago; Professor Alex-
andre Bennigsen, University of Chicago and Paris, France; Dr. Murray
Feshbach, Foreign Demographic Division, Department of Commerce;
Professor Gail Lapidus, Political Science, University of California,
Berkeley; Professor Teresa Rakowska-Harmstone, Carlton University,
Canada; Professor Edward Allworth, Columbia University; Professor
Michael Rywkin, City University of New York (CUNY); Professor Ste-
ven Burg, Oberlin College; Professor Mobin Shorish, University of
Illinois; Ms. Ann Sheehy, Radio Liberty analyst.
VOA correspondents abroad will also develop material in the major
regions to be covered.
The material developed for the VOA series will also be utilized as
appropriate in other USICA media:
—The VOA programs will inform coverage on the Agency’s Wire-
less File for use by our posts abroad.

Radio Free Europe, Radio Liberty, VOA
—We will identify certain programs/interviews which might be
recast as video programs. Such video tapes would be made available
to selected posts for local use with specific audiences.
—On a longer range basis, the material will also be adapted for
use in the Agency’s publication Al Majal, a monthly Arabic-language
magazine published for Near East and North Africa countries.
—Problems of Communism, in addition to an early 1980 article by
University of Chicago Professor Alexandre Benningsen on how Soviet
Muslims see the Muslim world outside the Soviet Union, will incorpo-
rate continued coverage of the Islamic peoples of the Soviet Union
and China.
As we develop these concepts, we will continue to look for addi-
tional ways to communicate effectively to our audiences the state of
the Muslim minority in the Soviet Union.
69.
Editorial Note
On December 5, 1979, Representative Elizabeth Holtzman (D-New
York), Chairman of the Subcommittee on Immigration, Refugees, and
International Law, called for National Security Council Staff member
Paul Henze to resign in a letter to President Jimmy Carter. The letter
was released to newspapers and drew attention to comments made by
Henze during the August 15 meeting of the Board of International
Broadcasting (BIB) in Washington. At the meeting, while discussing
the future of Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty (RFE/RL), Henze
referenced the May 1 interview broadcast on the Romanian service of
Radio Free Europe with Valerian Trifa, a Bishop of the Romanian
Orthodox Church in the United States and Canada. Trifa had been
accused of being a member of the Romanian Fascist Party Iron Guard
during World War II and responsible for instigating the Jewish pogrom
in Bucharest in 1941 and was under investigation by the Justice Depart-
ment. Holtzman asserted that Henze had characterized concern about
the Trifa interview as “silly” and that it “certainly isn’t serious from
the point of view of the White House.” Holtzman also directed the
Subcommittee staff to investigate the matter. (Carter Library, National
In his August 17 report to Assistant to the President for National
Security Affairs Zbigniew Brzezinski on the meeting, Henze made no
mention of the incident regarding Trifa. He detailed his impressions
of the contrast between the Board for International Broadcasting and
the Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty Corporate Board, his impression
that the Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty relocation “has been blown

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
out of all proportion to its real importance by the BIB Staff in conjunc-
tion with a few congressional staffers,” and the challenges faced by
the Radios in obtaining additional funds for their budget in a Zero
Base Budget environment and pressure for budgetary cuts across the
board. Henze also sketched out his idea of combining the Board for
International Broadcasting and the Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty
Corporate Board into “a public corporation with half Presidential
appointees, half public members representing a wide spectrum of inter-
ests and talents,” an idea which would allow for the removal of “bother-
some BIB Staff.” Henze wrote: “This has not been discussed with [Board
for International Broadcasting Chairman] Gronouski yet, but there is
increasing evidence that he would be ready to go along.” Henze concluded:
“Do not say anything until you and I have had a chance to review
all this further.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski
Material, Brzezinski Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 112, Radio Free
In an October 1 memorandum to Brzezinski, Henze discussed the
ongoing conflict, referencing a memorandum on BIB–RFE/RL coopera-
tion circulated by BIB staff to Congress and government agencies.
The memorandum accused Radio management, and especially Glenn
Ferguson of “free wheeling by the radios on the Hill.” Ferguson was
also the target of an article by Jack Anderson in The Washington Post
in which his compensation was made public. (Jack Anderson, “One
Happy Ending for ‘Boat People,’” The Washington Post, September 7,
1979, page C13) Henze wrote: “The present crisis is not going to go
away. We can solve it only by moving to solve the basic contradictions
in the present management and supervisory structure of the radios.”
Henze suggested that the administration combine the Board for Interna-
tional Broadcasting and the Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty Corpo-
rate Board into one entity. Gronouski, Henze suggested, should be
offered a different position within the administration—either at the
Department of Labor or the Department of Education. (Carter Library,
National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File,
Subject Chron File, Box 112, Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty/Voice
suggestion for Gronouski’s next appointment: head of the Voice of
America after Peter Strauss resigned, an idea which Brzezinski prom-
ised to pursue. (Ibid.)
Representative Holtzman’s investigation brought Henze’s com-
ments at the Board for International Broadcasting meeting in August
front and center. Henze wrote Brzezinski on December 7 defending
himself against the charges. He stated that the attack was carried out by
“elements in the BIB Staff and their collaborators among congressional
staffers” who were “frustrated because their scheme for crippling the

Radio Free Europe, Radio Liberty, VOA
radios by moving them from Europe to the U.S. (allegedly in the name
of economy) has fared badly.” The “selective citation” of his remarks,
Henze added, “neither reflects the context nor the spirit of what I said.”
Henze argued that that the Board for International Broadcasting staff
had been carrying out an ongoing vilification campaign against the
management of the radio, against himself, and, most importantly,
against Brzezinski. The ongoing “dywersja” (Polish: diversion), Henze
wrote, undermines the basic purpose of the stations. He continued:
“The stations are an asset to U.S. foreign policy and an important
service to the peoples who live under Communist domination.” What
is at stake, Henze concluded, is the maintenance of “professional inde-
pendence and integrity of Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty.”
(Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Horn/Special,
70.
Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination
Committee (Intelligence) Meeting1
SUBJECT
Broadcasting and Related Issues (U)
PARTICIPANTS
State
David Newsom, Under Sec. for
Frank Carlucci, Deputy Director
Political Affairs
[4 names not declassified]
**David Mark, Dep. Dir. INR
ICA
*Morris Draper, Dep. Asst. Sec.
*John Reinhardt, Director
Bureau of NE & So.
VOA
Asian Affairs
*Hans Tuch, Acting Assoc. Dir.
OSD
OMB
W. Graham Claytor, Jr.,
John White, Deputy Director
Dep. Sec.
Ronald H. Stivers, Asst. Dep.
BIB
Under Sec. for Policy
*John A. Gronouski, Chairman
Review
*James Critchlow, Planning and
Research Officer
tial. Drafted by Henze. The meeting took place in the White House Situation Room.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
JCS
White House
Lt. General John Pustay,
Zbigniew Brzezinski,
Asst. to the Chairman
Chairman
Justice
NSC
John Shenefield, Acting Asst.
Paul B. Henze, Notetaker
Kenneth Bass, Office of
Legal Counsel
*Present only for first portion of meeting.
**Present only for second portion of meeting.
The meeting was called to review proposals for improving broadcasting to
Muslim audiences. The Chairman opened the meeting by stressing the
urgency of the problem and the President’s concern about it. He said that
events of the past year had highlighted serious deficiencies in this area
but efforts to correct them had been proceeding too slowly. He cited
delayinimplementing anearlierdecisiontoinaugurateAzeribroadcast-
ing over VOA as an unfortunate example. The Deputy Secretary of
Defense noted that the United States would be allocating billions of dol-
lars to set up quick reaction forces and was even now spending sums far
greater than the cost of broadcasts to keep naval task forces steaming
around the Persian Gulf. The Chairman suggested that our defense out-
lays would not have to be so high if we had not neglected effective com-
munication with key groups such as Muslims. There was general agree-
ment among all present that urgent steps were needed. (U)
Before reviewing specific proposals of VOA and BIB for Radio
Liberty, the group reviewed the present status of Persian-language broad-
casts over the VOA. VOA was praised for having already expanded
Persian but there was unanimous consensus that what was now being
done—1½ hours per day in total broadcast time—was inadequate for
a crisis situation which was likely to continue for months if not years.
After discussion of personnel recruiting, transmitter allocation, possible
reduction of lower-priority languages and the significance of VOA
English-language broadcasts for Iranian and other Muslim audiences,
it was decided that the specifics of how to expand Persian broadcasts
as soon as possible would be taken up by the SCC Radio Working
Group which will report back to the SCC as soon as possible. The aim
will be at least to double VOA’s capacity to communicate in Persian,
both in terms of program content and transmitter power. (C)
VOA’s paper offering five option “packages” for expanding broadcasting
to Muslim audiences was then discussed.2
2 Dated December 4. (National Security Council, Carter Administration Intelligence
Meeting on Broadcasting and Related Issues, 11 December 1979)

Radio Free Europe, Radio Liberty, VOA
•Package I, priority expansion of broadcasting in Persian, Azeri, Urdu,
Bengali, Uzbek and Turkish, was unanimously endorsed. (U)
•Package II—construction of four new 250 KW shortwave transmitters
for broadcasts to South and Central Asia, had been approved, it was noted,
by the President in March 1977. VOA explained that ambassadorial
reservations about the willingness of the Sri Lanka government to
permit construction had delayed action. The Chairman said that a delay
of more than 2½ years in implementing a Presidential decision was
unfortunate and asked that a detailed report of actions taken or
attempted be prepared by State and ICA. He directed that urgent
diplomatic steps be taken to secure approval for beginning construction
as soon as possible and said the status of the effort should be reviewed
at frequent intervals by the SCC Radio Working Group, with any
impasse being referred back to the SCC for resolution. (C)
•Package III—expansion of additional Muslim-language broadcasts—
Hausa, Swahili, Indonesian, Hindi and Arabic—was unanimously
endorsed. (U)
•Package IV—adding four 250 KW shortwave transmitters to existing
VOA facilities in England, to provide replacement for obsolescent trans-
mitters in Germany and Morocco, was endorsed unanimously. These
transmitters will improve VOA’s capabilities toward Eastern Europe
and the USSR as well as the Near East. The Chairman noted that the
political situation in Morocco made it especially desirable that VOA
have an alternative for its transmitters there. (C)
•Package V—further increases in Persian, Azeri, Urdu, Bengali, Turkish
and Arabic to capitalize on South Asian and British transmitters, when
available, was also unanimously endorsed. (U)
The Chairman observed that improving broadcasts did not involve
only more programs and more transmitters, but better content in broad-
casts. The whole Islamic World is going through a rennaissance, he said,
and we must find ways of responding to it. The Director of ICA said that
his agency was giving high priority to getting improved research and
information input by contacting academic specialists. He said that his
agency did not believe that improvements in communication with
Muslim peoples should be confined to broadcasts but that all of ICA’s
techniques of communication should be employed. The group agreed and
the Chairman advised ICA to plan urgent expansion in other fields as
well. Though this meeting was concerned only with Muslim areas, the
Chairman added, the current crisis had revealed deficiencies in our ability
to communicate with other parts of the world as well which also needed
attention. (U)
The Committee then turned to the BIB proposals. The BIB Chairman
made an introductory statement which stressed Radio Liberty’s enor-
mous potential for impact on the 50 million Soviet Muslims and the
meager resources which had been applied to this task to date: only 46
people in all, including secretaries and researchers, for only 3½ hours
per week of original programming in 7 languages. Though the expan-
sion was not as easy as for East European or Russian, he said that

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
initial exploratory work left him confident that people for broadcasting
staffs could be found, researchers hired and trained and available
research materials much more effectively exploited. News and pro-
gramming-support offices in the Middle East were also needed. The
four expansion packages offered by BIB were then discussed:
•Package I—immediate steps to improve content and depth of RL broad-
casts in Uzbek, Tatar, Kazakh, Azeri, Tajik, Turkmen and Kirgiz—was
endorsed unanimously. (U)
•Package II—improving broadcast impact in the target area by leasing
transmitters in the Middle East was also unanimously endorsed, in princi-
ple. There was a good deal of discussion of the political ramifications
as well as the concrete technical possibilities of leasing in various
countries. The Chairman concluded by directing that opportunities in
Israel, Egypt, Jordan and Saudi Arabia be urgently explored and that
State facilitate BIB efforts in every way possible. The BIB Chairman
reported promising conversations with a high Israeli official and there
was general agreement that possibilities in Israel should be the first to
be explored. The Chairman cited the RFE experience in broadcasting to
Poland from Germany as negating worries that broadcasts transmitted
from Israel would not be effective with Muslim audiences. The Chair-
man suggested that BIB might want to explore transmitter leasing
opportunities farther afield but felt that the four countries named
should be urgently explored first. The SCC Radio Working Group will
monitor progress on this effort closely and report back to the SCC on
new problems or opportunities. (C)
•Package III—an extension of Package I—more comprehensive mea-
sures for improving and expanding RL’s Muslim-language broadcasts to 5½
hours of original programming per week was endorsed unanimously
with the understanding that it would be practical only if Package II
could be successfully implemented or transmitter power augmented
in some other way. In discussion of this package, BIB representatives
stressed the need for a solid information and research base to enable
RL to carry out its unique mission: in-depth coverage of internal affairs
and the special ethnic and cultural interests of its audiences, in contrast
to VOA’s primary mission of providing U.S. and international news
and commentary. (C)
•Package IV—a proposal for building four 250 KW transmitters some-
where in the Middle East was deferred for later consideration, pending
the results of the leasing effort. The Chairman emphasized that this
deferral was “without prejudice” and could be taken up again when-
ever BIB thought it opportune. (U)
The Chairman then turned to FBIS and noted that the services it pro-
vides, though excellent have been shown during the past year of crisis
in the Middle East, to be neither fast nor comprehensive enough. He men-
tioned the inadequacy of our knowledge of how and through what
channels distorted information about the Great Mosque incident in

Radio Free Europe, Radio Liberty, VOA
Mecca had traveled.3 [1 line not declassified] Questions of specific priori-
ties can be reviewed by the SCC Radio Working Group. (U)
In conclusion of this portion of the meeting the Chairman asked
the OMB representative to give high priority to working out plans for
meeting the needs for budgetary augmentation which the expansion
plans endorsed by the Committee would require, noting that in some
cases needs for new funding would be immediate while in others they
could be phased over two or three years. (U)
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to Voice of America.]
3 On November 20, Islamic terrorists seized the Grand Mosque in Mecca and
declared one of their leaders as Mahdi (redeemer of Islam). The Saudi Arabian forces
retook the Mosque after heavy fighting on November 27. Rumors that the United States
was behind the incident sparked protests in Pakistan on November 21, where the U.S.
Embassy in Islamabad was burned down and two U.S. citizens were killed. On November
24, Iranian leader Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomenei accused the United States and Israel
of being behind the attack and called for Muslims to rise up and defend Islam. On
December 2, a Libyan mob attacked and burned the Embassy compound in Tripoli.
71.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, December 12, 1979
SUBJECT
Broadcasting to Muslims (U)
The Summary and Conclusions of the SSC [SCC] I held on 11
December 1979 to review proposals for expanding and improving VOA
and Radio Liberty broadcasts to Muslim audiences [1 line not declassified]
are attached for your approval. (S/S)
The total yearly cost of all the steps that can be taken immediately
is not greater than [dollar amount not declassified] dollars. Our task forces
in the Persian Gulf area are probably costing this for only a few days’
on Broadcasting and Related Issues, 11 December 1979. Secret; Sensitive. Sent for action.
Brzezinski wrote the date on the document. Carter wrote “Zbig. J” at the top indicating
he wanted the memorandum returned to Brzezinski.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
operation. Longer-range improvements, which would be funded over
two or three years, add up to about [dollar amount not declassified]. (C)
I am inclined to think that if we had not let our ability to communi-
cate with this part of the world decline over a long period of time by
failing to add modest increments of funds regularly, we might not
have to be facing such large outlays of money for augmenting our
military capabilities in the region. The costs of improving our position
in the broadcasting field are extremely modest in comparison, but we
have no time to lose in setting about the job. I plan to have my staff
monitor everything we are doing in this field closely to ensure that
momentum is maintained. (U)
RECOMMENDATION
That you approve the Summary of Conclusions attached at TAB A.2
2 Tab A is attached but not printed. Carter neither approved nor disapproved the
recommendation and wrote in the margin: “This is a summary?! I approve the immediate
action, but OMB will have to assess for me the other new expansion projects. J.” Brzezinski
informed Vance, McIntyre, Turner, Reinhardt, and Gronouski of this decision in a Decem-
ber 13 memorandum. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material,
Brzezinski Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 112, Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty/
reported: “As a result of the SCC meeting on December 11, we are prepared and resources
permitting” planned to increase Persian broadcasting to six hours, as well as other
increases in broadcast times to countries with large Islamic populations. (National Secu-
rity Council, Carter Administration Intelligence Files, Box I–023, SCC Meetings Folders,
1979–1980 and Attorney General Actions, SCC(i) Meeting on Broadcasting and Related
Issues, 11 December 1979)

Radio Free Europe, Radio Liberty, VOA
72.
Memorandum From Paul Henze of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, December 19, 1979
SUBJECT
Broadcasting to Muslims—Need to Push OMB to release funds (U)
I had a good Radio Working Group yesterday afternoon. All partici-
pants are eager to move to implement the program which has already
been advertised in the New York Times2 —with one exception: OMB.
It is dragging its feet. It has been reluctant to give ICA all the money
it says it needs for VOA and even more reluctant to authorize new
positions. It has allocated no money to BIB for RFE/RL—with John
White maintaining that the SCC decisions, as he understands them,
do not permit giving any funds for improving broadcast content until
transmitters have actually been rented. This means that you wait to
hire people and improve research and monitoring until you have the
transmitters ready and then you wait another six months to broadcast
effectively while you build up programming. This is a recipe for sap-
ping initiative and inflicting unnecessary delay on ourselves to save
pennies. . . (C)
I have prepared a strong memorandum from you to McIntyre
attached at TAB A3 and recommend you sign it immediately. (U)
on Broadcasting and Related Issues, 11 December 1979. Confidential. Sent for action.
Copies were sent to Brement, Larrabee, Sick, and Odom.
2 Attached but not printed. David Binder of The New York Times published an article
two days earlier discussing the December 11 decisions to expand broadcasting to Soviet
Muslims in light of the ongoing hostage crisis in Iran and the ferment in the region.
Binder detailed the ongoing debates between the White House, the ICA, and the OMB
on the need for more transmitters to reach Soviet Muslims and identified Henze as both
a CIA employee and the former CIA Chief of Station in Turkey. (David Binder, “U.S.
Wary of Islamic Upheaval, to Increase Broadcasts to Moslems,” The New York Times,
into the matter. Henze wrote two memoranda to Brzezinski on December 18, the first
detailing his discussion with Binder, the second suggesting the administration take a
more proactive position. Henze argued: “On the issues which Binder raises, we risk
letting the impression develop that we are up to something illicit if we go on saying
nothing. The Administration should be getting credit for taking initiative on Muslim
broadcasts after decades of neglect (Persian stopped being broadcast under Eisenhower
in 1958!).” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Horn/Special, Box
3 Attached but not printed. According to an attached activity sheet, the memoran-
dum was returned to Henze on December 26 for revisions. There is no indication that
it was subsequently sent to McIntyre.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
73.
Memorandum From Stephen Larrabee of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, December 28, 1979
SUBJECT
Proposed Radio Liberty Broadcasts to Soviet Muslims (C)
Attached at Tab A2 is a memo from State outlining their strategy
for implementing the December 11 SCC decision authorizing them to
investigate the possibility of leasing transmitter time in Saudi Arabia,
Egypt, Israel and possibly Jordan for Radio Liberty programs beamed
at the Soviet Muslim populations. (C)
There are existing short-wave transmitters powerful enough to
reach Soviet Central Asia in Saudi Arabia, Egypt and Israel. Jordan
has no short-wave transmitters capable of reaching Soviet Central Asia
and therefore has been dropped from consideration. (C)
State argues—correctly in my view—that we ought to make our
first approach to the Saudis in order to capitalize on their strong sense
of responsibility for Muslim peoples and to offset any Saudi reaction,
should we later turn to the Israelis. While there may be some reluctance
on the part of the Saudis, State believes that a well-prepared approach,
explained as an information effort aimed at oppressed co-religionists
could overcome these hesitations. They recommend that the BIB send
a senior representative to talk to the Saudis and explore the possibility
of leasing transmitter time. (C)
If the Saudis prove unwilling, State recommends approaching
Egypt next. They caution, however, that Egypt may be wary of agreeing
to another highly visible bilateral project at a time when they are trying
to mend their fences with the Soviets. (C)
State thinks Israel should be approached only as a last resort, and
that the decision should be reconsidered if this is the only option. They
feel any broadcasts from Israel could be exploited by the Soviets to
blunt the impact of our effort directed at the Muslim populations. In
particular, the Soviets could portray the broadcasts as evidence of a
joint US-Zionist conspiracy. Embassy Tel Aviv shares this concern.
Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 112, Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty/Voice of
2 A December 22 memorandum from Tarnoff to Brzezinski is attached but not
printed.

Radio Free Europe, Radio Liberty, VOA
It feels that the potential advantages do not outweigh the negative
consequences which they see as following from such cooperation with
While Embassy Tel Aviv’s and State’s concerns have merit and
deserve careful consideration, it is questionable in my view whether
they are of sufficient weight to require abandoning the whole project
in Israel. For many years it was argued that RFE broadcasts to Poland
could not succeed if they were broadcast from West Germany. How-
ever, in the end locating the stations in Munich did not really impair
the effectiveness of RFE’s Polish broadcasts. While the two situations
are not entirely comparable, the RFE experience does suggest that the
location of the transmitters is less important than the content of the
programming. (C)
At any rate, we need not make this decision now. Our first priority
should be to investigate the possibilities of leasing transmitters from
the Saudis and Egyptians. If this fails, we can assess the pros and cons
of approaching Israel later. At the very least, prior approach to Saudi
Arabia and Egypt will cushion their reaction if we do eventually decide
to approach Israel. (C)
State has been in touch with the BIB, which is prepared to move
ahead along the lines indicated above and to send a mission to the
area in the coming weeks. (C)
RECOMMENDATION: That you approve the basic approach out-
lined above.
Approve3
As amended
Disapprove
Brement concurs.
3 Brzezinski approved the recommendation and wrote at the top of the memoran-
dum “Move fast.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
74.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to Vice President Mondale1
Washington, December 28, 1979
SUBJECT
Broadcasting to the Moslem World (U)
In answer to your query at the PRC yesterday,2 all the participants,
with the exception of OMB, are moving to implement the decisions
taken at the December 11 SCC on broadcasting to the Moslem World
and approved by the President. To date OMB has:
—released funds for VOA’s most urgent needs but been reluctant
to provide funds for the expansion of Hausa, Swahili, Indonesian,
Hindi and Amharic (the latter is particularly important)
—allocated no money to BIB for RFE/RL to improve the content
and depth of Radio Liberty broadcasts in Uzbek, Tatar, Kazakh, Azeri,
Tajik, Turkmen and Kirgiz on the grounds that funds for such steps
could not be released until arrangements for transmittal rental have
been accomplished. Improvements in these language services are
needed now, however, in order to have better broadcasts ready when
the transmitters are rented. Moreover, RL must begin to hire new
people for these languages, a difficult task which will take months and
which should be begun as soon as possible. (C)
Recent developments in Afghanistan3 have underscored the impor-
tance of moving rapidly to implement the December 11 SCC decisions,
particularly funding for VOA and RL programming needs. I think
Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 112, Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty/Voice of
on December 28 and noted he had coordinated it with Henze. (Ibid.)
2 On November 23, Robert Gates asked Gary Sick and Paul Henze to prepare a
memorandum for Brzezinski’s signature answering a query from Mondale about U.S.
actions to counter Soviet propaganda in the Persian Gulf. Henze provided Brzezinski a
draft memorandum on November 26. In his covering memorandum, Henze asked Brze-
zinski to engage Mondale as a supporter of a more assertive U.S. approach to international
broadcasting. (National Security Council, Carter Administration Intelligence Files, I–023,
SCC Meeting Folders, 1979–1980 and Attorney General Actions, SCC(i) Meeting on
Broadcasting and Related Issues, 11 December 1979) Aaron signed the memorandum
on Brzezinski’s behalf on November 27, reporting that severe budget limitations imposed
on RFE/RL and VOA prevented progress. (Ibid.) On December 27, Mondale again asked
about broadcasting to Muslim audiences.
3 On December 25, Soviet airborne troops began arriving in Kabul, Afghanistan.
On December 27, Soviet Army and KGB troops attacked the Presidential Palace in Kabul
and killed Afghani President Hafizullah Amin. Concurrently, Soviet ground forces began
crossing the border into Afghanistan.

Radio Free Europe, Radio Liberty, VOA
a memo from you to Jim McIntyre would help to overcome OMB
footdragging. (C)
75.
Memorandum From Paul Henze of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant to National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, January 11, 1980
SUBJECT
Money for Radio Expansion (U)
One month ago today the SCC endorsed proposals for expanding
broadcasting to Muslims and the President approved these actions two
days later. But, as the New York Times reported from Munich yesterday
(TAB A),2 Radio Liberty still hasn’t received a penny of the money needed
to do the job. OMB’s bookkeepers pinch pennies, question the intent
of the SCC actions and think up reasons why the money shouldn’t
be provided.
Your credibility and mine with the radios and the BIB is suffering.
Does the Administration really mean what it says? Is the President
really behind expanded broadcasts? Do SCC and NSC decisions not
apply to OMB?
Particulars: The NYT gave both VOA (TAB B)3 and RL (TAB A)
attention yesterday. The piece on VOA talks about what it is going to
do and sounds pretty good, but it all has to be done yet and impact
demonstrated. RL, which is probably even more eager to move than
VOA, tells it how it is: pitifully limited output now because Soviet
Muslim broadcasting has been kept on a starvation diet for years;
enormous potential for expansion; frustration. Bill Reese, who is quoted
in the article, is a feisty Jerry Funk type. He is the man I described to
you after my visit last summer as bringing a whole new potential into
the Caucasian and Central Asian field. A former Peace Corps volunteer
Brement, Larrabee, Sick, Hunter, Thornton, Odom, Ermarth, and Griffith.
2 Attached but not printed at Tab A is John Vinocur, “Radio Liberty Stressing News
3 Attached but not printed at Tab B is Graham Hovey, “Voice of America Aims

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
in Turkey, he conducts daily programming meetings in Turkish and
has RL’s motley team of (mostly aging) Tatars, Uzbeks, Azerbaijanis,
Kazakhs, Tadzhiks, Turkmen and Kirgiz motivated as they have never
been before.
John White of OMB has refused to return my calls since before
Christmas. I finally got through to Ed Sanders, Deputy Associate Direc-
tor for International Affairs, yesterday and told him I was preparing
a report for you on implementation of the radio decisions and wanted
to know what OMB’s problem was. He said White didn’t agree with
the SCC decisions as I described them. White understood the SCC to
have decided that the radios didn’t need any money until they secured
new transmitters. I said he was wrong. I repeated for the umpteenth
time that even without new transmitters they needed to beef up broad-
casting by hiring new people, developing new news research and pro-
gramming resources to be able to highlight Middle Eastern develop-
ments—and if they did get new transmitters, they needed to have all
these other things done to make effective use of them. He said they
thought they could reprogram, cut something else out. I said the SCC
had not even considered that “option”. We wanted no cuts in Polish
or Romanian to be able to broadcast to Azerbaijanis and Uzbeks. This
was not in the national interest. Again, for the umpteenth time, I said
the problem was that all radio broadcasting had been shortchanged
for years and everything needed to be expanded.
The truth is that OMB has not reversed the $2.2 million cut it made
this fall, over our strong objections, in RFE/RL’s FY–81 budget; RFE/
RL is already running short this year and currently faces the necessity
of firing 40 people!
The Administration’s program for expanding radio broadcasting
will soon be exposed as hollow rhetoric unless ample funds are assured.
(VOA has been allocated some extra funds by OMB, but far less than
is needed to accomplish what they are under orders to do.) Given the
insignificant amount of money required (compared to defense out-
lays)—the entire SCC package of 11 December is well below $10 mil-
lion—all of this penny-pinching agony is idiotic. There is no question
about popular and congressional support for what we want to do.4 I
continue to get letters and calls praising us for the decisions that were
4 In a January 23 letter to Carter, AFL/CIO President Lane Kirkland decried the
insufficient funds made available to broadcasting to the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe.
(Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 9, Board
to Dodson, Henze suggested a reply to Kirkland should stress the December 11 SCC
decisions for immediate actions and emphasize that funds are being made available.
David Aaron concurred with Henze’s recommendations and added a note that reads:
“we share the sense of urgency” expressed by the AFL/CIO President. (Ibid.)

Radio Free Europe, Radio Liberty, VOA
leaked by Binder on 16 December. There have been no negative
responses whatsoever. When we originally faced communications chal-
lenges in the 1950’s, we simply made sizable sums of money available
and gave the people we put in charge of radio operations the green
light. The money was spent well. We have no reason whatsoever to
believe that the competent management of RFE/RL will not spend
every penny that is made available to them now with full effectiveness.
If we really mean what we say, we should assure them of $20 million
over the next year and tell them to rush ahead. The results will be
impressive.
One of the most serious shortcomings of this Administration, when
it is able to formulate good ideas and take decisions, has been its
incapacity to perform, to implement, to carry out what it says it wants
done. We seem to have another striking instance of it in the broadcast-
ing field.
RECOMMENDATION
Since your effort to get the Vice President to pressure OMB to
honor the SCC/Presidential decisions on broadcasting has produced
no results, the only course left open, if we are not to tell BIB/RFE/RL
to abandon the effort, is for you to take up the issue with McIntyre,
getting beforehand whatever bolstering you feel you might need from
the President himself.
76.
Memorandum From Leo Cherne to the President’s Assistant
for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
New York, March 28, 1980
RE
Board for International Broadcasting
Public Law 93–129 which created the Board for International Broad-
casting in 1973 did so because Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty
had been reconstituted as a privately organized Delaware Corporation
with its own corporate board of directors, corporate chief executive
and professional and engineering staff. Since the work of the Radios
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
was to be openly funded by the U.S. Government, it appeared essential
that a presidentially-appointed board of five members, assisted by a
small professional staff, assure the Congress and the President that
the mission was properly performed; the moneys properly spent; the
engineering equipment and technology be equal to the task; and that
the RFE/RL broadcasts meet the highest standards of “quality, effec-
tiveness and integrity”.
The request that I consider nomination to the BIB as its Chairman,2
led to a short but intensive assessment of the reality which presently
prevails, as well as the contribution, in character and magnitude, such
a responsibility would entail.
The conclusions reflected in this memorandum owe much to con-
siderable detail, candor, and important judgments which I received
from able and distinguished people who presently or previously have
carried substantial responsibility in the areas this memorandum dis-
cusses. My study was partial and too brief but, in my opinion, sufficient
for me to form certain judgments about the problems which confront
the Radios and particularly the private and public boards, their officers
and staffs.
Though I suspect there are such instances, I’ve been unable to
identify a noteworthy occasion when the BIB adversely affected the
operation of the Radios. Nor have I found an occasion when that Board
was of any significant assistance to the operation of the Radios. It may
be that advocacy needed for the large increase in transmitters or their
location in recent years is such an instance. This is only one of a number
of many such questions time and propriety did not permit adequate
inquiry. On those questions for which I sought answers, my conclusions
are as follows.
The BIB and its staff are essentially incapable of performing their
assigned mission. The factors involved in this negative conclusion
include the following:
No board of five advisory members, meeting four times a year,
or twice that often, can more than casually assess operations of the
magnitude performed by RFE/RL.
2 Leo Cherne served under Presidents Nixon and Ford on the President’s Foreign
Intelligence Advisory Board, first as a member and then as chairman. After Carter’s
election, PFIAB was disbanded, and Cherne became President of the International Rescue
Committee in New York. His name was considered for the chairmanship of the BIB,
but Cherne turned down the offer. On May 15, Schultzberg published an article in The
New York Times discussing the approach by Henze and Brzezinski to Cherne and Paul
Seabury to join the BIB Board as well as the opposition from Senate Foreign Relations
Committee members. (A.O. Sulzberger, Jr., “U.S. Overseas Radio Stirs Dispute Again,”

Radio Free Europe, Radio Liberty, VOA
The membership of BIB has at no time contained more than one
or two people with special or recognized capacity to perform such
complex studies.
The Board’s present and projected membership is not of the stature
which would compel high respect by RFE/RL, its staff and, especially,
its corporate board and officers.
The exceptional stature and experience of the RFE/RL Board fur-
ther intensifies the disparity in quality, depth, and competence,
between the two Boards and virtually assures reluctant and minimal
cooperation.
Although it is intended that BIB concentrate on certain defined
areas of “oversight” and the Board of RFE/RL concentrate on “opera-
tions”, these distinctions are largely artificial. More importantly, one
purpose cannot be pursued without “invading” the other.
Since the part-time membership of BIB is clearly inadequate to its
task, more than normal or desirable authority resides in its staff.
That staff, especially its chief members, has become the most signifi-
cant part of the problem. Of five professionals, two appear to have a
potential for useful contribution. The Executive Director of BIB’s staff
and at least one of the staff assessing program content and quality
maximize the friction (inherent in the present arrangement) between
the two Boards and unnecessarily burden both.
The distance of both Boards from the main sites of broadcasting
operations further complicates the oversight functions.
It is difficult to imagine a laboratory more suited than is the BIB
to the proof of several of Parkinson’s propositions.
Quite presumptuously, but with deep conviction, the following
steps (not easy to accomplish quickly) are recommended:
The next Chairman of BIB must, whatever the resistance from his
colleagues who may cherish their distinction and tasks, move to bring
the existence of the Board for International Broadcasting to an end. In
the interim, in order to improve cooperation between the Boards and
assist the Chairman of BIB to perform the responsibilities assigned by
law to BIB, all or a large part of the Board’s present staff must be
replaced promptly. It may not be necessary to fill more than two of
the five positions if this diagnosis is correct—the position of executive
secretary and the staff member concerned with financial oversight. To
fill the other vacant positions risks creating a greater number of people
with a vested interest in perpetuating their positions.
The most important purpose which should be pursued by the
chairman and executive director, should be the designing of the means
to terminate the Board’s existence, with the approval of Congress and
in such a way as to satisfy the Congress that its serious purpose will,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
in fact, be better performed by the existence of one Board—the Board
of RFE/RL.
The difficulty which flows from the fact that the RFE/RL Board is
a “private” Board must be overcome. I offer several not carefully
thought out alternatives.
1) Can the RFE/RL structure, and especially its officers and Board,
be made quasi-public with the responsibility to report to Congress and
the President? The present operation is, in fact though not in form,
quasi-public.
2) Should the RFE/RL Board elect a five-member committee of its
members with those members appointed to the BIB by the President
subject to Congressional approval? Redundancy of membership is vital
if this approach is to work so long as the BIB continues to exist.
The formation of such a five-member committee of the Board of
RFE/RL has an additional virtue. The present full Board of RFE/RL
has exceptional experience, competence and stature. It is, however, too
large to function as an effective board of directors. The present size
and range are suggestive of an aggregation of consultants covering the
very wide scope of the expertise required to guide the Radios.
3) Should the GAO and OMB assume a large part of the necessary
oversight and accounting?
This memo closes with several questions. My inquiry was insuffi-
cient to examine them.
1) Does the present arrangement and the present functioning of
RFE/RL provide a broadcasting capability sufficiently responsive to
U.S. needs in a radically changed world?
2) Are we still over-reacting to the sensitivity about government
abuse of the Radios which flowed from the period of intense concern
with our intelligence activities?
3) Do the Radios fill the new target needs—ethnic, religious, geo-
graphic and political—so large a part of present and future foreign
policy concerns?
4) Can our national needs be fully served by ably run broadcasting
instruments, staffed by gifted journalists seeking to preserve a reputa-
tion for accuracy, objectivity and independence? Each makes an impor-
tant contribution to credibility. At what cost, in a very new time?
Leo Cherne

Radio Free Europe, Radio Liberty, VOA
77.
Memorandum From Paul Henze of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, June 13, 1980
SUBJECT
Expanding Radio Broadcasting
It is exactly six months today since the President approved the recom-
mendations of the 11 December 1979 SCC on expanding broadcasting
to Muslim audiences.
Not much has happened as a result. VOA has expanded some of
its broadcasts but it took the sharp attack in the Post a few weeks
ago to jolt ICA/VOA into facing up to the task of broadcasting to
Afghanistan seriously—and it will still be weeks (or months) before
Dari broadcasts are on the air. I am asking ICA/VOA for a report on
just what has been added since last December—for what they say they
are going to do and what they accomplish often involves a large gap.
The press, as you know, is increasingly focusing on this problem.
With RFE/RL the picture is much worse. Not a penny has been
allocated to expanding Muslim broadcasting staffs and no new trans-
mitters have been leased or otherwise secured. The transmitter-search
effort is still bogged down. If the purpose of Binder’s NYT article was
to cause enough commotion about this subject to stymie progress, it
has been achieved. BIB and OMB have been in league to tie the whole
issue up in bureaucratic haggling while they pursue “relocation”
(which would hardly contribute anything to increasing the radios’
effectiveness). Latest from Munich is that BIB has now ordered the
radios to prepare to relocate all the Baltic services back to the US. This
speaks poorly for Gronouski’s skill as a politician and judge of ethnic
issues—for the Balts are going to be up in arms. I find, in fact, that
Lithuanians already raised this issue in a meeting with Steve and
David2 earlier this week. A fine reward for the Balts in the 40th anniver-
sary year of their takeover by the Soviets—move RL’s Baltic services
back to the US.
I was glad to see R. Evans place the BIB maneuvers against the
radios in the context of detentists trying to maintain their position—
for there is a lot of validity to this accusation. The WSJ raised it too.
2 Stephen Larrabee and David Aaron.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
The problem (as far as RFE/RL are concerned) is not policy as such,
but lack of power. With VOA it is more policy and lack of quality and
judgment in certain respects. All these issues need to be aired—and it
increasingly looks as if they will be, publicly, if Freedom House, the
Georgetown Center holds meetings on them. I have the feeling that the
Evans and Osnos pieces in today’s Post may spark further journalistic
investigations.
RL’s lack of power is depressing. At the IREX/ICA seminar I
attended last Friday (and already reported to you on briefly) there was
a great deal of discussion of radio listening in Central Asia by the
four American grantees who had just returned. But none cited RL—
its broadcasts are too weak in signal to be heard with any dependability
by Central Asians. . .
While we fiddle, the Soviets expand. Look at the attached piece
ICA has recently issued on expansion of Moscow’s World Service
in English.3
Chto Delat’?—Frankly, I don’t know. I despair of this Administra-
tion’s capacity to face up to these issues now. We could hold another
SCC—if you want to get out front. Short of that, I plan simply to
continue calling attention to the problem, pressing where we can to
get something done, bit by bit. But we can’t expect much from RFE/
RL until they get some money and stop being harassed by BIB on
tangential issues. They have squeezed out what they can from presently
available resources. They have a whole list of good Central Asians, etc.
ready to hire . . . but instead they have to spend their time drawing
up plans to move the Balts back to New York. . .
3 Not attached.

Radio Free Europe, Radio Liberty, VOA
78.
Memorandum From Paul Henze of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, August 7, 1980
SUBJECT
BIB and RFE/RL Muslim-Language Broadcasts
REFERENCE
Walter Roberts’ Letter to you of August 1, 1980 (U)
stratagem to put you over the barrel on problems which the BIB has
handled badly. The main reason why the BIB has made no progress
in working out an agreement with the Egyptians for transmission time
and/or facilities is the leaking of our plans for expanding Muslim
broadcasts. These leaks, you will recall, came immediately after SCC
decisions were taken last December (Binder in NYT, December 16,
1979).3 This story, taken up and repeated over and over again in subse-
quent months, by Moscow among others, embarrassed the Egyptians
and naturally aroused doubts in their minds about the wisdom of doing
business with an organization such as the BIB. [2 lines not declassified]
It is not surprising under such circumstances that the US Embassy in
Cairo now concludes that BIB-sponsored broadcasts from Egypt should
be given low priority because they could become controversial domes-
tically for Sadat. If the purpose of Shub’s original leak to Binder was
to frustrate the expansion plan and keep it from being implemented,
it has come close to being achieved. (S)
Walter Roberts’ letter is specious in several respects. He poses the
issue of broadcasting from Egypt solely in terms of building transmitters
Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 113, Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty/Voice of
America: 1980. Secret; Sensitive. Sent for action. Copies were sent to Albright, Brement,
and Sick. On August 11, Brzezinski wrote in the left-hand margin of the first page: “Paul,
let me know what the others say on the 3 options. OK on the letter to Roberts. ZB.”
2 Dated August 1; attached but not printed. The letter addressed the impasse reached
by RFE/RL in their negotiations for additional transmitter facilities. (See Document 73.)
Roberts wrote that the delay in negotiations in Egypt meant that two transmitters initially
destined to be installed in Portugal but now slated for Egypt in order to bolster transmit-
ting power to Central Asia might end up in Portugal after all, delaying the expansion
of transmitting power to Central Asia by 18 months. Brzezinski forwarded the letter to
Henze on August 4, asking for a brief report on the situation. He also asked that Henze
draft a response to Roberts under his own signature.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
there. The SCC-approved plan was to investigate renting or leasing time
on existing transmitters—with the issue of building new ones left open.
The aim was to get added impact immediately, not to spend months/
years building new transmitters before broadcasting was actually
expanded. If transmitters are to be built, it is obvious that there are
closer locations to the target area to build them—[2 lines not declassified].
A transmitter building scheme should be separately reviewed and
approved by the SCC and the President, not dealt with in an informal
letter from Walter Roberts to you. (S)
In some circles concerned with the radios (Barthelemy, Lisann,
some people in congressional staffs) a great deal of opposition to build-
ing transmitters in Egypt has developed and there is a minor storm
brewing on this issue. Jan Nowak has picked up a good deal on it. It
is typical of the kind of acrimonious argumentation which develops
around all radio issues and which the BIB Staff exacerbates instead of
trying to resolve. (C)
You recall OMB’s stubborn refusal last winter to make funds avail-
able to RFE/RL for program expansion so that the radios could be
ready with expanded programming as soon as more transmitter time
was secured. Your efforts to get OMB to release funds did not succeed.
No money has ever been allocated. The BIB Staff has colluded with
OMB and congressional staffers to frustrate the large scale effort
mounted by Jan Nowak and others (including the radios themselves)
to circumvent OMB and the BIB by getting concerned Congressmen
to include additional funds in this year’s appropriations for the radios.
All these efforts have failed. OMB and the BIB have entangled themselves
in an impossible bureaucratic circle: no money for programming until
transmitters are available; no transmitters because leaks alarm the
Egyptians; no serious effort to develop possibilities in other countries;
no transmitter building program because that costs too much money;
no expanded broadcasting. The KGB could not have devised a better
scheme to keep us from achieving Presidentially approved action
plans! (C)
Meanwhile energy has been diverted by the sordid smear campaign
the BIB Staff launched against Leo Cherne, Paul Seabury, you and
me—which goes on and on, as you can see from the Pravda piece of
reappoint Gronouski in the midst of this has made a travesty of our
whole effort. Domestic politicking takes priority over serious foreign
policy purpose. The BIB Staff, under Gronouski, works to undermine
our efforts to make the radios more effective. Both Gronouski and the
4 Not attached.

Radio Free Europe, Radio Liberty, VOA
Staff have in recent months put 25 times as much effort into harassing
the radios with relocation schemes than they have put into executing
plans for expanded Muslim-language broadcasts. In effect, Walter
Roberts’ letter says to you: “If you want expanded Muslim broadcasts,
arrange it for us; otherwise we can’t do it.” He has never sought or
shown any receptivity to our advice on relocation schemes. (U)
Can anything constructive be done? I am skeptical. One approach
would be to tell Atherton to tell Sadat that BIB broadcasts have high
priority and we want the Egyptians to make time available. Sadat might
or might not accept this argumentation. He would certainly expect us
to do something about leaks [less than 1 line not declassified] has permit-
ted us to set up. Experience offers no basis whatsoever for believing
that we can keep Tony Shub from telling Binder anything we try to
arrange with Sadat—successful or otherwise. Given other problems
and opportunities we have in Egypt, I am not sure that the BIB aims—
given their small chance of success—are not really fairly low in priority.
So I recommend against making an issue of this with Sadat. (S)
What is your inclination?5
AGREE
DISAGREE
[1 paragraph (17 lines) not declassified]
But we can’t let the BIB off on this so easily and leave them free
to concentrate on relocating pieces of the radios to the U.S. and reducing
their effectiveness. The need for expanded Muslim-language broadcasts is
greater than when we took the decision in mid-December. The invasion of
Afghanistan has generated ferment among Soviet Muslims which is
going to continue indefinitely and which opens up unexpected oppor-
tunities for greater receptivity for informative news and commentary
from the outside world. The spillover potential of such broadcasts in
Iran and Afghanistan is also great. So why not order the BIB to proceed
rapidly to lease time on transmitters in places other than Egypt and, at
the same time, to develop plans for building transmitters in locations
closer to the target areas? The BIB is not the best instrument for pursuing
this kind of program—for the BIB Staff obviously contains subversive
elements who want to frustrate, not further, American policy objectives.
Moreover, the BIB members themselves have little skill or talent for
pushing this kind of thing. But if we don’t do this—what do we do?
The radios, which continue to function well in spite of BIB and have
great unrealized potential, are largely at the mercy of the BIB. One
could try to draw the radios directly into exploring expansion—they
are much more likely to do an effective job than BIB. (C)
5 Brzezinski did not check either option, but wrote in the margin: “I basically agree,
but would it be an issue?”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
How does this kind of approach strike you?6
FAVORABLY
UNFAVORABLY
As to more immediate tactics: I do not recommend that you answer
Walter Roberts’ letter at all. He has avoided direct communication with
me for nearly six months. Gronouski has likewise avoided contact and
has been saying scurrilous things about you in Polish ethnic circles. I
suggest I send a brief note (Tab C)7 to Roberts acknowledging his letter
to you and proposing a meeting to review the problems caused by the
failure of the BIB to implement the decisions on expansion of Muslim
broadcasting we took eight months ago. I would not expect to accom-
plish much by such a meeting—Roberts may even refuse to come. But
it would at least give us the opportunity to keep these people under
pressure. (U)
Keep in mind the fact that anything we do—and in particular
anything I do—in respect to the BIB is bound to result in further attacks
in the press and through congressional staffs and further allegations
[1 line not declassified]. I am not willing to enter into a new phase of
this without speaking out to defend myself. (U)
In the medium to longer range we are not without allies. The
commotion the BIB Staff generated against Leo Cherne, on balance,
was counterproductive for it. At the moment morale in the radios and
among all of us who would like to see the radios freed to maximize
their potential is sagging. But if the Senate fails to8 confirm Gronouski’s
reappointment (likely I suspect) the BIB Staff’s current resurgence of
arrogance will be of brief duration. Meanwhile the Freedom House
study of the radios will be progressing and the Reagan campaign is
getting interested in them and in the BIB. Even if there is not a great
deal we can accomplish now, radio jeszcze nie zginielo. (U)9
I have expended as much emotion on these problems as I intend
to for the foreseeable future. If you wish to turn the problem over to
someone else for independent assessment and action planning, I will
not be in the least offended. In any event I will welcome advice from
other concerned staff members on what might be done. (U)
6 Brzezinski did not check either option, but wrote in the margin: “I don’t get this?!”
7 Not attached.
8 Brzezinski underlined “fails to” and wrote in the margin: “what is the evidence?”
9 English translation of Polish: “Radio is not dead yet.”

Radio Free Europe, Radio Liberty, VOA
79.
Memorandum From Stephen Larrabee of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Assistant
for National Security Affairs (Aaron)1
Washington, August 20, 1980
SUBJECT
Jamming of VOA (U)
As of 9:00 a.m. this morning the Soviets began jamming VOA (in
Russian, Ukrainian and Armenian) as well as BBC and Deutsche Welle.
This is the first time that the Soviets have jammed VOA since they
ceased jamming it in August 1973. (Radio Liberty of course has contin-
ued to be jammed.) As far as can be ascertained at the moment, RFE
broadcasts to Eastern Europe not previously jammed—i.e., Poland,
Rumania and Hungary—have experienced no increased interference
or jamming. (C)
The last time that the Soviets resumed jamming of VOA was in
August 1968 just after the invasion of Czechoslovakia. (Prior to that,
VOA had not been jammed since 1963.) The Soviet action most likely
reflects the Soviets’ fear of the impact on their own population of news
about the unrest in Poland. The fact that Deutsche Welle is also being
jammed reinforces the view that the Soviet action is primarily related
to Poland (rather than Afghanistan or some other event). Moreover,
given the Ukraine’s close historical ties and geographic proximity to
Poland—as well as its strong indigenous nationalism—it is no accident
that the Soviets have begun jamming VOA’s Ukrainian service as
The Soviet action is an important development. It is a clear violation
of the Helsinki Accords and attests to their intense concern about the
impact of news about the Polish unrest on their own population. The
Soviets would not undertake such a move lightly, since it will affect
their relations not only with us but with other West Europeans, particu-
larly the West Germans. Moreover, it is likely that the jamming will
endure well beyond the duration of the unrest in Poland. (C)
for action. In a brief memorandum to Carter the same day, Aaron reported that VOA
was being jammed by the Soviets and noted that the last time this happened was
prior to the invasion of Czechoslovakia. (Ibid.) Carter initialed Aaron’s memorandum,
indicating that he saw it.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
Attached at Tab A is a statement condemning the Soviet action,
which I asked State to draft.2 It has been cleared by Christopher. BBC
has already issued a statement and I think we should release ours
immediately. State agrees. I also think it should be released by State.
Al Friendly concurs.
RECOMMENDATION
That you approve release by State of the attached statement.3 (U)
2 Not attached. The Department released the statement on August 20 and sent it
to Moscow as guidance in telegram 221806 to Moscow, August 20. (National Archives,
3 Aaron approved the recommendation. On September 19, ICA Director Reinhardt
sent a memorandum to Brzezinski on the status of Soviet VOA jamming as well as VOA
attempts to counter Soviet actions. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski
Material, Subject File, Box 9, Board for International Broadcasting (RFE, RL, VOA):
80.
Memorandum From Paul Henze of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, November 13, 1980
SUBJECT
Radios—Seabury Memorandum to Reagan Transition Staff
Paul Seabury has sent me a copy of a brief memorandum he wrote
to the Reagan Transition Staff on the evening of election day recom-
mending an approach to the RFE/RL–BIB problem.2 Combined with
the Freedom House report which should be released any day now, it
gives the new Administration a good workable set of proposals for
coping with this problem which has proved beyond the capacity of
the present Administration.—We have at least achieved these two
results from our otherwise abortive effort to draw Leo Cherne and
Brement, and Griffith.
2 Printed below. Paul Seabury was a professor of Political Science at University of
California, Berkeley, and a specialist in foreign policy and intelligence.

Radio Free Europe, Radio Liberty, VOA
Paul Seabury into radio activities last spring.3 This curiously dialectic
process may in the long run turn out to be more effective than the
solution we aimed at and failed to bring about.
Attachment
Memorandum From Paul Seabury of the University of Califor-
nia, Berkeley, to Monroe Browne of the Ronald Reagan Transi-
tion Staff4
Berkeley, California, November 4, 1980
RE
U.S. OVERSEAS BROADCASTING
The new Administration should establish a Presidential Commis-
sion to review and report on the state of U.S. overseas broadcasting
activities. Priority should be given to broadcast stations targeted on
the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe: Radio Liberty and Radio Free
Europe.
These stations play an enormously important role by conveying
to people in those areas a continuous and objective view of political
and social reality which their Soviet rulers seek to deny them. As
an earlier Presidential Commission on this subject reported in 1973,
the Radios
. . . by providing a flow of free information and interpretation,
have enabled the people to whom they broadcast to remain informed
and to judge for themselves which policies may contribute to . . .
genuine improvement of peaceful relations.5
Such a review should focus upon three topics: budget, program
content, and administrative oversight. Of the three, the latter is the
most urgent and immediate.
Budget. While the stations maintain a high caliber performance,
they have been seriously injured by budget cuts at a time when inflation
and the declining value of the dollar on international exchange have
severely constrained them. This issue is all the more acute if one
assumes the need for a significant expansion of broadcast activities,
3 Henze and Brzezinski contacted Seabury and Cherne about serving on the BIB
5 Presidential Study Commission on International Radio Broadcasting Report (1973).
[Footnote is in the original.]

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
especially in the Soviet Union and especially toward minority areas
such as Muslim regions.
Program content. The popularity and credibility of RL/RFE in recent
years has been due to their high caliber reportage of news from within
the Soviet-dominated world, which is “looped back” in radio programs.
As currently constituted, the radios are not information organs of the
U.S. government in the sense that VOA is. They have a special mandate,
and the operative constraint is that their programs are not incompatible
with the aims of U.S. policy.
As evidence of the awesome outward thrust of Soviet power accu-
mulates, the question now arises as to whether the program content
of RL/RFE should pay greater attention than now to matters directly
related to East-West relations. Soviet domestic propaganda, since the
Afghanistan war began, more than ever has sought to place the blame
for increased international tensions on the West, and the U.S. in
particular.
Last year, for example, East-West relations were discussed only .8
percent in Russian and 4 to 10 percent in other languages. Nearly all
news and discussion focusses upon intra-bloc events in the Communist
world. The value of this emphasis is undeniable: the radios provide
reportage on current reality in the world which the listener knows first
hand; they offer a means to make an enlightened comparison between
open and closed societies; they demonstrate through individual experi-
ence the hypocrisy and unreliability which are hallmarks of official
communication in a communist state. In particular, they provide a
crucial feedback look for Samizdat communications without which dis-
sidents would remain hopelessly isolated.
The question now is whether these invaluable functions of the
radios should be supplemented by a more vigorous exploitation of
East-West relations, to countervail Moscow internal propaganda. (This
question is not unrelated to the question of whether current VOA
broadcasts to the U.S.S.R. have been (as Solzhenitzyn and others have
charged) vapid and inconsequential.)
Oversight. Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty for twenty years
were separate and largely supported by the Central Intelligence
Agency. Now they are funded by Congress and governed by a Board
of Directors composed of private citizens. This board, in turn, has been
overseen since 1973 by a five-member Presidentially appointed Board
for International Broadcasting.
This clumsy structure has been an invitation to struggle for the
privilege of supervising the Radios. The reason for this Rube Goldberg
arrangement originally was that, on the one hand, a private board
would enhance the credibility of the Radios, in assuring listeners that

Radio Free Europe, Radio Liberty, VOA
they were not CIA creatures; a Presidential supervisory board, the BIB,
would serve to confirm the Radios’ accountability to Congress.
In practice, this oversight structure has led to protracted conflict
between the two boards and to well-confirmed charges that the Wash-
ington-based BIB interferes constantly in day-to-day operations of the
Radios. Both the chairman of the BIB and the BIB’s staff director have
repeatedly made it clear that they regard such direct supervision as
part of their mandate. Moreover, they have repeatedly exerted pressure,
both on Capitol Hill and in the White House, to block appointments
of new board members not sharing their view of their prerogatives.
This impasse cannot be permitted to continue indefinitely. It dis-
tracts the attention of Radio executive personnel from their central
tasks, and has had a demoralizing effect on broadcasting personnel.
Thus a Presidential Commission should directly address the ques-
tion of ways to resolve this administrative impasse. But the Commission
also—by enlarging its agenda to include the Voice of America—could
also chart new guidelines for U.S. informational activity overseas for
the difficult years of the 1980’s.
I wish in closing to draw attention to a detailed report recently
completed by Freedom House on the subject of RL/RFE. This document
has been withheld from publication until after the elections. It was
prepared with the assistance of Leo Cherne, John Richardson, Howland
Sargeant and myself.

Bulgaria
81.
Editorial Note
On May 12, 1977, Bulgarian Communist Party (BCP) General Secre-
tary Todor Zhivkov removed Bulgarian Politburo member Boris Vel-
chev, the putative number two man in the Bulgarian leadership, from
all Party and government posts. Velchev’s fall came as a surprise to
the U.S. Embassy in Sofia—and to the entire diplomatic community—
as he had been generally regarded as among the most likely to succeed
Zhivkov to the leadership when the Bulgarian leader retired or died.
Speculation in Sofia was extensive as to the reasons for Velchev’s
dismissal. The fall was due to a power struggle between Zhivkov and
Velchev, brought on by policy differences especially on the Macedonia
question. (Telegram 1030 from the Defense Intelligence Agency, May
Office of Analysis for the Commonwealth and Eastern Europe, Office
Party 1977)
In telegram 1004 from Sofia, May 13, the Embassy posited that
Velchev’s firing must have been approved by Moscow, and may be a
consequence of his refusal to agree to a softening of relations with
Yugoslavia. (Ibid.) However, in telegram 1015 from Sofia, May 16, the
Embassy reported its sources “flatly discounted reports” that Velchev’s
removal was caused by differences between him and Zhivkov regard-
ing policy toward Yugoslavia. Velchev’s removal on May 12 and that
of several of his protégées, the Embassy stated, was a consequence of his
refusal to accept a demotion to Chairman of the National Assembly—
a largely honorific position—an offer made several weeks before the
May Plenum, as well as disagreements regarding appointments in the
Party apparatus. (Ibid.)
Two new appointees to the BCP Central Committee Secretariat—
Dimitur Stanishev and Petur Dyulgerov—the Embassy reported, fur-
ther solidified Zhivkov’s control over the Bulgarian Party and Govern-
ment. The new appointees were young, owed their career and loyalty
to Zhivkov, and had no independent power base. They joined other
rising “superstars” of the Central Committee Secretariat—including
newly appointed Minister, Politburo member, and Zhivkov’s daughter,
Lyudmila Zhivkova. (Ibid.)

Bulgaria
82.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
Bulgaria1
1. Remainder of Washington tour was as impressive as first leg of
visit. Highlight was Zhivkova’s attendance (accompanied by inter-
preter only) at White House reception for American artists afternoon
of June 14. Mme. Zhivkova was on time (a first during the visit), and
was escorted from the West Wing into the Reception Room by Vice
President and Mrs. Mondale. She met with several artists and cultural
leaders and was introduced to the President and Mrs. Carter by Assist-
ant Secretary (CU) Duffey.3 Zhivkova told the President her trip was
very well organized and she was enjoying it very much. She thanked
him for the opportunity of bringing the Thracian exhibit to the US and
signing the US-Bulgarian cultural agreement.4 The President responded
by saying he was happy she was able to visit this country and asked
Zhivkova to give his best wishes to “her father.” Clearly pleased, she
said she hoped the President would visit Bulgaria “soon.” Next day’s
Post and Star style sections reported on reception noting about 70
attended, including Warhol, Wyeth, Nancy Hanks, several art critics
and collectors, and others, including Johnny Cash. Mme. Zhivkova’s
presence was not reported.
2. Prior to White House reception Zhivkova and party toured and
were visibly impressed by Air and Space Museum, Hirshhorn, and
National Gallery. Informal and enjoyable luncheon hosted by National
Gallery curator was in special area of gallery restaurant, where Zhiv-
kova enjoyed exceptionally large chocolate sundae. Musical extrava-
Confidential; Immediate. Drafted by Brown; cleared by Carol Owens (CU/EE); approved
by Andrews.
to New York for the opening of the Thracian Gold exhibit at the Metropolitan Museum
of Art, to San Francisco, and to Los Angeles as well as her first days in Washington.
3 On August 31 Carter signed a letter thanking Zhivkova for her gift of a book
entitled The Kazanluk Tomb. (Carter Library, White House Central Files, Countries, Box
States and Bulgaria signed a Comprehensive Agreement on Exchanges and Cooperation
in Cultural, Scientific, Educational, and Technological fields in Washington. Assistant
Secretary of State for Educational and Cultural Affairs Joseph D. Duffey signed the
agreement on behalf of the United States. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
Policy File, D770211–0386)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
ganza at Wolf Trap called “Fat Tuesday” about New Orleans at Mardi
Gras time was enjoyed by all and was not marred by expected rain.
Zhivkova, however, preferred Ibsen.
3. June 15 schedule was less hectic, with call on Acting Secretary
Congress and luncheon with Daniel Boorstin, and afternoon of shop-
ping. Boorstin agreed to put on exhibit of Bulgarian manuscripts at
some date in near future which pleased Bulgarians very much. Evening
reception hosted by Popov at Shoreham Americana Hotel (to which
Zhivkova arrived one-half hour late) was attended by Ambassador
Reinhardt, Assistant Secretary Vest, Nancy Hanks and about 200 others
(including several Bulgarian Orthodox priests, a first at an Eastern
European reception here as far as we are aware). Nothing was sched-
uled morning of June 16 beyond last-minute shopping for educational
toys. Zhivkova, Damyanov, Minekov and Petrov were seen off at Dulles
by EUR/EE Director Andrews at 12:45 p.m. for Concorde transatlantic
flight. Others were taking jumbo jet later in the day.
4. Entire visit went quite smoothly, and Zhivkova was clearly
impressed by the program, the level of reception the hospitality and
the “attention” paid her. Generally speaking, she did not have much
of substance to discuss (memcons with Reinhardt and some others
being pouched) and did not herself raise matters outside her area of
responsibility. We learned from interpreter, however, that Zhivkova
regarded meeting with Acting Secretary as extremely valuable and
substantive. In any event, we believe the Zhivkova visit has given
impetus to the relationship—the degree to which it will really help
depends on Zhivkova’s report on her return to Bulgaria and on the
Bulgarian ability and will to take specific measures to improve our
relations.
Christopher
5 See Document 83.

Bulgaria
83.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
Bulgaria1
140379. Subject: Zhivkova Call on Acting Secretary Christopher.
1. Mme Zhikova, accompanied by Ambassadors Popov and Damy-
anov and interpreter, called on Acting Secretary June 15 for half hour
discussion. Bulgarian TV crew filmed her arrival and the first few
minutes of meeting.
2. Following usual courtesies, the Acting Secretary expressed pleas-
ure over presence in New York of Thracian exhibit and signing of
Cultural/Scientific Exchanges Agreement. He hoped that these events
would presage more exhibits and exchanges, not only in the cultural
but also the scientific field. Zhikova responded that the Bulgarian side
was also gratified by the exhibit and signing. She pointed out that from
her viewpoint the exhibit opening and the agreement signing were
not pure coincidence, and expressed hope that future exchanges will
maintain the same high moral and spiritual standards as symbolized
by the Thracian treasures exhibit.
3. The Acting Secretary expressed USG appreciation to the GOB
for its assistance in resolving divided families cases. He noted that
the reunification of families has not only personal importance to the
individuals involved but symbolic importance for our bilateral
relations. The Acting Secretary specifically expressed thanks for the
resolution of the difficult Marev case.2 Zhivkova stated that she was
happy to note the positive development of US-Bulgarian relations in
Confidential; Priority. Drafted by Brown; cleared by Andrews; approved by Oxman.
2 In 1967, Spas Iordanov Marev and his wife, Ivanka Atanasova Mareva, defected
while on vacation in Istanbul, leaving behind two daughters, ages 1 and 3. After making
their way to the United States, the Marevs petitioned the Bulgarian Government repeat-
edly to allow the children to join them but their requests were denied. In August 1976,
the Marevs began a public protest in front of the Department of State demanding the
met with Bulgarian Ambassador to the United States Popov and stressed the importance
of resolving the Marev case quickly. Given the “interest to both Secretary Vance and
himself” in the case, Christopher told Popov that a “very heavy burden would be placed
on US-Bulgarian relations if this case continued.” (Telegram 38061 to Sofia, February
visit of Lyudmila Zhivkova added additional pressure, and the Bulgarian Government
agreed to allow the children to emigrate by the end of May. (Telegram 1144 from Sofia,
Policy File, D770216–1183)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
recent years. She was certain that relations will continue to follow an
ascending line, and stated that we have a duty as nations to compensate
for what has been missed in bilateral relations thus far. The Acting
Secretary assured her that the US would do what it could to
improve relations.
4. The Acting Secretary broached East-West relations, noting that
the US is actively working on detente with the USSR, which has impor-
tance for the atmosphere of US-Eastern European, and specifically US-
Bulgarian, relations. He expressed hope for progress in relations with
Moscow. Zhivkova agreed that a working relationship between the
superpowers is the only reasonable alternative and will define the
world’s future. She said she rejected the notion advanced by “some
specialists” that by curbing arms and military technology we curb the
development of science. She emphasized that human progress can be
a reality only when all resources are focussed on the development of
humanity in general and the “individual” in particular.
5. Ambassador Popov interjected a question about MFN.3 The Act-
ing Secretary noted that he had no news to report on MFN front, but
pointed out that overall developments, and improving relations, can
facilitate progress in that field also. He added that the MFN issue is
rooted in the administration’s relations with Congress. Zhivkova noted
her belief that intensified cultural relations will lead to improved
relations in other areas as well.
6. The Acting Secretary agreed that an exchange of peoples and
ideas can influence commercial ties. In that regard, he noted that he
may attend the main Belgrade Conference on CSCE follow-up. He
explained that the US attaches great importance to implementation of
the Final Act, and gives equal weight to each of the Baskets. The US
has no intention of provoking a confrontation and does not wish to
put any one “in the dock” in Belgrade, but seeks a careful review and
assessment of progress under the Final Act. He hoped that the GOB
would regard the approach as constructive. Zhivkova stated that the
GOB would make a statement at Belgrade on the importance of examin-
ing all three Baskets. She noted that the Third Basket now seemed the
most “popular”, but asserted that “Basket Three will remain empty if
Basket One and Two are not filled.”
3 While Poland, Romania, and Yugoslavia all enjoyed MFN status, Bulgaria’s pros-
pects were dim. PD–21, which expanded the differentiation to include internal liberaliza-
tion (thus allowing for the extension of MFN status to Hungary) placed Bulgaria, together
with Czechoslovakia and the German Democratic Republic, among the countries where
no favorable trade benefits would be extended until concrete steps toward a more
independent foreign or domestic policy were undertaken. See Document 16.

Bulgaria
7. Zhivkova ended discussion by extending her gratitude for the
hospitality and attention which she and her delegation had received.4
She noted that regardless of the brevity of her visit she has a sufficient
impression of the US to know that she will continue to work towards
improved relations. Acting Secretary expressed US pleasure over the
visit, passed Secretary Vance’s greetings to Zhivkova, and said that
both he and the Secretary appreciate the real contribution Zhivkova
has made to US-Bulgarian relations.
Christopher
4 Setting up Zhivkova’s visit presented the Department with the challenge of finding
an appropriate host, given her official cabinet-level position of Director of the Committee
of Art and Culture and her unofficial status as daughter of Todor Zhivkov. (Telegram
failing to find an appropriate host would turn the prospective visit “from an asset in
our relations to a liability.” “Without wishing to be alarmist” the Embassy continued,
“there exists potential for a needlessly embarrassing incident if Mrs. Zhivkova were to
decline the invitation to come to Washington from New York because of the manner in
which we had ‘invited’ her without taking into account her status in the power structure
On May 6, the Department informed the Embassy that Nancy Hanks, Chairwoman of
the National Endowment for the Arts, would act as the official host, and that Mrs.
Mondale was prepared to receive Zhivkova at the White House. (Telegram 104082 to

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
84.
Telegram From the Embassy in Bulgaria to the Department
of State1
1. As we have earlier reported Foreign Minister (and Politburo
member) Petur Mladenov plans to attend the UNGA in New York
2. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs has specifically requested a meet-
ing between Mladenov and Secretary Vance. The Bulgarians have also
indicated, here and in Washington, that if a meeting in New York is
not feasible at that time, Mladenov would appreciate a meeting in
Washington.
3. Embassy strongly recommends that the Secretary see Mladenov.
Mladenov is the only Eastern European Foreign Minister who has not
had an opportunity to meet with the Secretary. Moreover, gradually
improving Bulgarian-American relations and expressed Bulgarian offi-
Confidential. Sent for information to USUN.
be informed of the level, dates, and duration of attendance of high-level delegations to
on July 13 Himmirsky informed the Department that Mladenov would travel to New
York for the UNGA and “would like to meet with the Secretary between September 25
and September 28.” Himmirsky also said that, if the Secretary “were not in New York
but were available in Washington during that period, Mladenov would be willing to
see him in Washington.” The Department reiterated its support for such a meeting, but
stressed that the Secretary’s schedule for New York had not been finalized. (National
impression on the Bulgarian side that a meeting between the two Ministers had been
proposed Mladenov-Vance meeting in September was not fully and finally set.” “We
are off the hook” he continued, but concluded that “I am sure Mladenov is counting on
the meeting. I of course strongly hope and expect that the meeting will take place.”
File, D780309–1097)

Bulgaria
cial interest in consideration for MFN on the basis of existing American
legislation make such a meeting very much in US interest.4
4. Embassy has no indication of likely Bulgarian Chief of State or
Head of Government attendance at UNGA, and considers it unlikely.
Without raising the question, we will of course report any change in
this situation.
Garthoff
between Vance and Mladenov at the UNGA and forwarded the Bulgarian request for
a response by September 15. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
Embassy that the Vance-Mladenov meeting had not been approved. (National Archives,
informed the Embassy that “the chances of such a meeting would be virtually nil even
with another strong recommendation from the Ambassador” and that Nimetz would
be willing to meet with the Foreign Minister sometime between September 26 and 28.
that “Tsvetkov was visibly crestfallen” at being told that a bilateral with Vance was not
possible and turned down a meeting between Nimetz and Mladenov. (National Archives,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
85.
Telegram From the Embassy in Bulgaria to the Department
of State1
1630. Belgrade also for CSCE Del. Subject: Exit Interview With the
1. In accordance with instructions, I used farewell protocol call on
Foreign Minister Mladenov July 27 for review of some pending bilateral
matters and especially of CSCE implementation. Ambassador Gotsev,
Chief of Fourth Department, attended. In view of nature of the occasion,
Mladenov was extremely affable and (with exception of complaint
Confidential. Sent for information to Belgrade, East Berlin, Bucharest, Budapest, Moscow,
Prague, and Warsaw. Herz also met with Todor Zhivkov on June 28. (Telegram 1634
not to raise the issue of a new chancellery site with Zhivkov during his farewell call on
the Bulgarian leader. Rather, Herz was to commend the Bulgarian leader for improve-
ments on family reunification cases and express appreciation for the success of the
Zhivkova visit to the United States. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
File, D770256–0629)
Committee on Decolonization (Committee of 24), the Department expressed the hope
that a vote on Puerto Rican independence may be avoided in 1977. (National Archives,
Government had informed its Consulates in the United States that all affidavits of support
for Bulgarian citizens wishing to travel to the United States would no longer be acceptable
unless notarized by the Bulgarian Embassy in Washington. The Embassy reported that
it had informed the Foreign Ministry that such policy would contravene Article 35 of
the Consular Convention the two countries signed in April 1974. (National Archives,
Ambassador Herz planned to raise with Bulgarian Foreign Minister Mladenov in his
upcoming conversation. As part of the discussion, Herz informed the Department, he
planned to present Mladenov with a list of unresolved cases of family reunification.
to stress with Zhivkov and Mladenov the “many bilateral US-Bulgarian exchanges on
CSCE implementation [which] have proved mutually beneficial.” Herz was also
instructed to emphasize with the Bulgarian leadership the “importance we attach to
further bilateral efforts to implement the Final Act” before the main CSCE meeting in
7 See footnote 3 above.
the Puerto Rico démarche to the Bulgarian Government and that it had thanked Bulgaria
for the helpful role it “(claims to have) played” on the question in 1976. (National

Bulgaria
about MFN “discrimination”) gave positive or soft responses to all
points which required responses. He did not, for instance, in connection
with CSCE Basket III discussion, refer to RFE.
2. In discussing bilateral relations I began with positive comments
on family unification authorized ref A, remarking I would return to
that subject in connection with CSCE. I noted recent positive develop-
ments such as Zhivkova visit, opening of Thracian exhibit in New
York, and prospects for agricultural cooperation exemplified by Shopov
visit. Then I referred pointedly to Puerto Rico issue (ref B and F), noting
that within its possibilities Bulgaria had tried to be helpful last year
on a subject we regard as internal US matter, and therefore one which
could have disturbing effect on our relations. I also referred in positive
terms to Bulgarian willingness to enter into early negotiations with
Bondholders Protective Council.
3. Next I took occasion to follow up on the demarche with Vice
Minister Tsvetkov (ref C) on subject of authentication of documents,
explaining (when Mladenov said he “had not seen my note”) that we
had not yet made any formal representations because we simply could
not believe that Bulgaria would place itself deliberately in violation of
our consular agreement. I had to bring this matter to Mladenov’s atten-
tion because my friendly demarche to Tsvetkov June 9 had been without
effect and recently some affidavit authentications by our Consul had
again been refused. It would be unfortunate if my successor as one of
his first items of business had to charge Bulgaria with breach of an
international agreement. Mladenov undertook to look into matter
immediately, saying Bulgaria always scrupulously fulfills its interna-
tional obligations.
4. Next I presented verbatim the remarks on CSCE as per para 2
ref E, with one change: Instead of saying “We believe further implemen-
tation efforts on your part will contribute towards creation of a more
positive atmosphere at the main meeting” I said “We believe further
implementation on your part and our part”, to remove note of sancti-
moniousness and possible impression of arrogance contained in the
original phrase, and particularly because there are further positive
steps which we intend to take and to which I was later able to refer.
Mladenov clearly took in the link between our desire for “constructive
and non-polemical” meeting and need for more Bulgarian efforts at
implementation.
5. Going into specifics I said on divided families that while great
strides had been made, there remain some cases of urgent humanitarian
concern (ref D) where delay or inaction must be due to misunderstand-
ings or administrative mix-ups. I then handed Mladenov two lists, one
containing seven “approved” cases from the 1975 list which for various
reasons are stymied, the other containing fourteen new cases. I singled

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
out one case from each list to illustrate the varied nature of difficulties.
Mladenov said categorically that any difficulties must be administrative
since the political decision had been taken to let such people go.
6. In this connection, Mladenov made a rather revealing remark
about the Marev case which, he said, had required an extraordinary
effort because of “existing laws and regulations”. He had had to have
personal discussions with the Minister of Justice and the “Attorney
General” and since the laws did not allow the case to be resolved
expeditiously, “we had to make some alterations” in order that such
“private cases” should not impair relations. (I read this to mean that
with Mladenov’s help the party overrode the Ministries of Interior
and Justice.)
7. Next I referred to what more we might do in the field of visits,
in accordance with para 3 (a) ref E, followed by remarks about Basket
II as per ref D,9 and remarks about deficiencies in Basket III implementa-
tion, notably with regard to publications (despite the cosmetic changes
made by the Bulgarians), also as per ref D. Finally I said that with
respect to facilitation of travel we are currently carefully considering
steps we might take to reciprocally facilitate both private and official
travel, as per para 3 (b) ref E.10
8. The positive remarks that Mladenov made in reply were of
the kind suitable to the occasion of leave-taking. He thought it was
fair to say that “never, since World War II” have relations between
Bulgaria and the US been better. (Comment: This is of course not
saying much since for ten years they were worse than with any EE
country other than Albania, and the Bulgarians began moving toward
normalization only about four years ago, probably at the prodding
of the Russians.)
9. On CSCE, Mladenov said he welcomed our statement about the
utility of bilateral consultations and of our general attitude toward the
main Belgrade meeting. In usual manner he stressed Basket I, admitted
shortcomings in Basket II (“not everything can be rectified immedi-
ately”) but counter-charged with respect to MFN; and with respect to
Basket III said: “We are making progress on divided families, but do
not think they are the main content of Basket III.” He said Bulgaria is
Basket II, “much remains to be done” and “restrictions on appointments and access
remain significant problems and greatly hamper trade expansion.” (National Archives,
remarks to statement that USG is currently carefully considering steps we might take
to reciprocally facilitate both private and official travel.” (National Archives, RG 59,
Central Foreign Policy File, D770266–1272)

Bulgaria
not unconcerned about Basket III, and what I had said under instruc-
tions would be given full consideration.
10. Then he said something of a more general nature. He reminded
me that in recently expressing thanks (at Ruse) for hospitality shown
to his daughter, Zhivkov had talked to me not as President but “as a
father”. If existing “discriminations” could be removed (MFN), he fore-
saw a much higher level of interchanges of all sorts, not only in business;
and he felt that contacts during the last three years had served to
remove many misunderstandings and demonstrated that good things
can come from high Bulgarian and American officials meeting and
talking together.
11. I interpret this last remark to mean that the Bulgarians, while
not wishing to be too explicit for fear of a rebuff, are looking for
some sort of high-level contact between Zhivkov and the President
or between Secretary Vance and Zhivkov. Zhivkov has several times
referred favorably to his “meetings with President Ford” at Helsinki11
(where there was only the most perfunctory contact), and there is no
question in my mind that he and Mladenov are eager for the kind of
legitimation that such a real meeting would involve. At the same time,
they also have in mind the occasions, which still rankle, when President
Ford and his Secretary of State visited Belgrade and Bucharest, practi-
cally overflying Bulgaria, without stopping here.12
12. This is my reading of the Bulgarian attitude. As for our own
interest, there are two aspects: one is what we might expect to get out
of a high-level visit here. Certainly we cannot expect any substantial
change in Bulgaria’s overall orientation. The other aspect is more com-
plicated. It is not that the Bulgarians have anything urgent to talk with
us about at a high level, but they know that their country is the only
one in Europe with which we maintain diplomatic relations that has
not been visited by an American President, Vice President or Secretary
of State. So the second aspect involves, in their view, the removal of
what they see as a “discrimination”.
13. I think it would be inappropriate for me to make a recommenda-
tion on this matter so shortly before my departure from Sofia. One
thing, however, I can recommend. Foreign Minister Mladenov will be
at the UNGA starting September 25. I believe it would be helpful in
11 Zhivkov met with President Ford during the signing ceremonies for the Helsinki
Central Foreign Policy File, D750318–0459)
12 President Ford visited Bucharest and Belgrade following the signing of the Hel-
with President Ceausescu. In Yugoslavia he met with President Tito and Prime Minister

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
getting my successor off to a good start here if Secretary Vance could
reserve a quarter hour for a bilateral with Mladenov in New York.
Herz
86.
Editorial Note
On September 7, 1978, Georgi Markov, a Bulgarian playwright and
defector who worked as a broadcaster for the British Broadcasting
Corporation Bulgarian language service and with Radio Free Europe/
Radio Liberty was taken to hospital after collapsing in Central London.
From his hospital bed, Markov reported that while waiting for a bus
on Waterloo Bridge, he felt a sharp pain in his thigh, turned around,
and saw a man picking up an umbrella and quickly walking away.
(Telegram 232700 to Sofia, London, and Munich September 14; National
died three days later in a London hospital. Following another similar
attempt on Vladimir Kostov, a Bulgarian dissident in Paris, Markov’s
body was exhumed and his death was declared a homicide. (Telegram
Foreign Policy File, D780379–0009) The Embassy in Bulgaria was
informed on October 11 that the Central Intelligence Agency had
advised the Department of State that the method of delivery of the
poison in the Markov and Kostov cases was identical. (Telegram 257014
to Sofia, October 11; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
File, D780415–0915) The pellet used in the Kostov attempt was
recovered intact.
Speculation on Bulgarian Secret Police involvement was rife in the
Western press. The Bulgarian Government made several protests over
treatment of Bulgaria in the media in the United Kingdom, Italy, the
Federal Republic of Germany, and Spain. Bulgarian Foreign Minister
Mladenov raised the issue with British Minister of State for Foreign
Affairs Lord Goronwy-Roberts, when he visited Bulgaria. (Telegram
Policy File, D780444–0578)
In his book Spymaster, former KGB General Oleg Kalugin alleged
that the Bulgarian Secret Police requested help from the KGB for the
Markov assassination on direct orders from Bulgarian General Secre-
tary Todor Zhivkov. Kalugin suggested that it was the KGB who devel-
oped the ricin poison, the delivery method, and trained the Bulgarians
in the use of the umbrella weapon. (pages. 203–212)

Bulgaria
87.
Telegram From the Embassy in Bulgaria to the Department
of State1
3204. Subject: Markov Affair and Bulgarian-American Relations.
1. In a frank discussion at a private luncheon meeting, the Ambassa-
dor noted to Ambassador Gotsev, head of the MFA Fourth Dept (who
will be accompanying Deputy Foreign Minister Tsvetkov to the US),
that the Markov affair had generated real disquiet and concern in
Washington. He noted that during his recent consultations the subject
repeatedly arose and weighed quite negatively against other positive
achievements in improving Bulgarian-American relations.
2. Gotsev was very attentive and reacted principally by sober
silence. He asked whether it had influenced the decision not to hold
a meeting of Foreign Minister Mladenov with Secretary Vance. The
Ambassador replied that he did not know what considerations Secre-
tary Vance might have had in mind, and that there were real scheduling
problems, but that he did know that the matter did figure in the consid-
eration of some senior officials who may have had a voice in the
decision that a Vance-Mladenov meeting could not be arranged at this
time.2 Gotsev made no comments on either the Markov affair itself nor
on American or other Western press treatment of it, in marked con-
straint to earlier reported protests to several Western countries over
press reactions.3
Garthoff
Confidential; Limdis.
2 In telegram 284347 to Sofia, the Department commended Garthoff for “the deft
manner in which the Ambassador discussed this matter with Gotsev” and suggested
that officials in Washington “plan to mention it to Tsvetkov in similar fashion during
officials complained to the British, Italian, and West German Governments over press
treatment of Bulgaria regarding the Markov affair. (National Archives, RG 59, Central
Foreign Policy File, D780444–0578)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
88.
Briefing Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State
for European Affairs (Vest) to the Counselor of the
Department of State (Nimetz)1
Washington, undated
SUBJECT
Your Meeting with Bulgarian Deputy Foreign Minister, Boris Tsvetkov,
PARTICIPANTS
US
BULGARIA
The Counselor
Deputy Foreign Minister Boris
Ira Wolf, C
Tsvetkov (phonetic: tsVETkawv)
Carl W. Schmidt Director, EUR/EE
Director, Department IV, Ministry of
James H. Glenn (Notetaker) EUR/EE
Foreign Affairs Lyuben Gotsev
(phonetic: GOTTseff)
Ambassador to the United States
Konstantin Grigorov (phonetic:
greeGORov)
First Secretary of Embassy Krassin
Himmirsky (phonetic:
heMEERskee) (Interpreter)
BACKGROUND
Bulgarian Deputy Foreign Minister Boris Tsvetkov is visiting Wash-
ington from November 14–17 at the invitation of Assistant Secretary
Vest.2 Tsvetkov is one of six Deputy Foreign Ministers. He is responsible
for relations with the United States, Western Europe, and Canada as
well as international organizations, disarmament matters, and eco-
European Affairs, Bulgaria Desk, Personal Files of Retired Ambassador to Bulgaria,
Confidential. Drafted by Glenn; cleared by Schmidt, Gilmore, Fried, Brown, and Kaplan.
A handwritten notation indicates that the meeting was rescheduled from November 15
to November 14. This copy of the briefing memorandum is not initialed by Vest and
there is no indication that Nimetz saw it. The conversation, which was reported to the
Embassy in telegram 293671 to Sofia, November 18, covered the situation in Cyprus and
Bulgarian-Yugoslav relations. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
D780476–0141). Tabs A and B are attached but not printed.
2 Vest invited Tsvetkov to visit the United States on May 10 for consultations on
bilateral and international issues, to include discussions on CSCE. (Telegram 119286 to
While in Washington, Tsvetkov also met with Vest (telegram 292505 to Sofia, November
File, D780500–0999). A brief protocol meeting with Christopher dealing with family
reunification cases took place on November 15. (Telegram 291363 to Sofia, November

Bulgaria
nomic affairs. Tsvetkov will meet briefly with the Deputy Secretary
and hold talks with a number of officials in the Department and other
executive agencies. (His schedule is at Tab A) Biographic sketches of
Tsvetkov and the other Bulgarian participants in the meeting are at
Tab B.
KEY ISSUES
1. International Issues
Essential Factors—Although significant Bulgarian foreign policy
decisions are fully coordinated with Moscow, it is our policy and
interest to treat Bulgaria as a sovereign state responsible for its own
actions. Tsvetkov will be interested in your comments on US-Soviet
relations, SALT, and Cyprus, which the Bulgarians regard as essentially
an extension of the Balkans. You may wish to ask him about Bulgarian-
Soviet relations and the situation in the Balkans including recent Bul-
garian approaches to Albania.
Bulgaria and the USSR remain the closest of allies, but lately we
have received indications that the USSR may have decided to curtail
substantially its former ample subsidization of the Bulgarian economy.
Bulgaria participated in the first Inter-Balkan Conference in Athens in
1976, but since then has refused, presumably at Soviet behest, to agree
to a second multilateral meeting.3 Taking the line that Balkan prob-
lems can best be resolved on a bilateral basis, the Bulgarians have re-
cently exchanged high-level visits with Greece, Turkey, and Romania.
Bulgarian-Yugoslav relations continue to be strained over the Macedon-
ian issue. Since the PRC stopped economic aid to Albania last July,
Bulgarian propaganda has focused selectively on Albanian condemna-
tion of the PRC while ignoring continued Albanian vilification of the
USSR. Recently, Bulgaria has indicated to Albania that it would wel-
come closer relations, but Albania apparently fears that Bulgaria is
acting simply as a Soviet stalking horse.
Points to be Made
—US-Soviet relations—Our relationship is basically competitive, but
both sides recognize the need to avoid deterioration and to expand
areas of mutually beneficial cooperation.
the absence of Soviet opposition to a multilateral Balkan conference, Sofia was not
interested in participating in such a meeting. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
Policy File, D770479–0959) The Embassy in Bucharest agreed. Ambassador Aggrey noted
after a discussion with Romanian Deputy Foreign Minister Vasile Glica: The Bulgarians
“have entered specific reservations about multilateral cooperation in CSCE context, and
expressed view that issues and problems between Balkan states should be discussed on

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
—SALT—Differences between the US and Soviet positions have
been narrowed over time. Nevertheless, some distance between us still
exists on key issues. We cannot predict when a SALT agreement will
be signed.
—Cyprus—We believe that the Cyprus problem must be resolved
under UN auspices by the parties directly involved, the Greek and
Turkish Cypriots.
—We support UN SYG Waldheim in his efforts to mediate the
dispute and will help him in every possible way.
—Bulgarian-Soviet Relations—How would you characterize the
present Soviet view of E–W relations?
—Balkan Cooperation—What is your Government doing to enhance
the multilateral project for cooperation in the Balkans?
—Albania—What direction do you think Albania’s foreign relations
will take now that the Chinese have ended their economic aid?
2. Bilateral Relations
Essential Factors—Since the advent of detente, improvement in US-
Bulgarian relations has occurred. We have negotiated a number of
agreements with the Bulgarian Government, and several high-level
visits have taken place, including visits by the Secretaries of Commerce
and Agriculture.4 Progress has been made in resolving divided family
cases, although markedly less in the past year. Now, however, the GOB
appears to be attempting to cut off further discussions of divided family
questions with the US and other Western embassies. On November 9
our Embassy was told that there are no outstanding humanitarian
issues facing the GOB and that the Foreign Ministry will accept for
discussion only cases involving US citizen sponsors and spouses and
minor children (defined as under 16) of US citizens.
Last summer the Bulgarian Government retained a New York law
firm to advise it on what it would have to do to obtain MFN. The
firm’s report may have sobered Bulgarian expectations somewhat.
Tsvetkov may allude to MFN although the Bulgarians do not wish to
appear in Moscow to be taking an initiative. Our position is that we
would be prepared to discuss the process for obtaining MFN in detail
with GOB officials, should they be interested in such discussions.
The GOB has been unable or unwilling to assist Embassy Sofia
effectively in finding another chancery site. The lease on the present
building expired last June, and the GOB has informed the Embassy
that it must move as soon as possible. Thus far, the Bulgarian Govern-
4 The last U.S. Cabinet-level official to visit Sofia was Secretary of Agriculture Butz
in 1976.

Bulgaria
ment has not shown an acceptable new building or site to the Embassy.
We have informed Ambassador Grigorov that we expect substantially
better cooperation from the GOB on the chancery problem before we
will sign a lease for two lots in the Van Ness Center which the Bulgari-
ans have selected as a new chancery site.
Points to be Made
—The resolution of divided family cases will be extremely impor-
tant in determining the extent to which we will be able to continue to
improve relations. This issue has considerable resonance in the Ameri-
can public and the Congress. We urge you to cooperate with us in the
speedy resolution of the remaining cases, especially the Slavova case.
(This case involves the wife and children of Atanas Slavov, a Bulgarian
emigre writer who lives in New York City.)
—Our Embassy has not received much cooperation from Bulgarian
Government officials in resolving the chancery problem. We, on the
other hand, have materially assisted Ambassador Grigorov in his
attempts to find a new chancery site here. We believe such cooperation
must proceed on a reciprocal basis.
—(If Tsvetkov raises MFN) We do not believe that the possibilities
for increased trade under present conditions have been exhausted. We
would be prepared to discuss our requirements for granting MFN tariff
status and how they might apply to Bulgaria. N.B. Mr. Vest will deal
with the question of the recent attacks on Bulgarian emigres employed
by BBC and RFE in a separate meeting with Mr. Tsvetkov.5
5 Vest raised the Markov affair privately, at the end of his meeting with Tsvetkov.
He expressed Washington’s concern over the incident and urged the Bulgarian Govern-
ment to cooperate fully with the investigation. (Telegram 294433 to Sofia, November 21;

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
89.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
Bulgaria1
305798. Subject: (C) Assessment of Tsvetkov Visit.
1. (C-entire text)
2. Immediate benefits. The most immediate benefits of Tsvetkov’s
visit were the clarification of each side’s position on various issues
and the establishment of personal contact between officials of the two
foreign affairs establishments.2 Both sides gained a clearer understand-
ing of each other’s terms for improving relations, i.e., the importance
we attach to progress in resolving divided families cases and the impor-
tance the GOB attaches to improved economic relations (the “spine”
of bilateral relations, to cite the word Tsvetkov used at Commerce)
and to simultaneous progress in all aspects of relations. Such progress,
Tsvetkov implied, would assist in the resolution of divided family
cases. The fact that a Deputy Foreign Minister had talks in Washington
was also a symbolic plus for the GOB.
3. Closer consultations—The GOB clearly desires closer consulta-
tions as indicated by Tsvetkov’s invitation to Vest to visit Sofia within
the year and Tsvetkov’s apparent approval of a visit early next year
of a team headed by EUR DAS Goodby to review CSCE implementation
and to discuss preparations for Madrid. We hope that a by-product of
the visit will be enhanced access for Embassy Sofia officers to GOB
officials.
4. Dialogue on conditions for MFN? The GOB obviously would
like to obtain MFN tariff status. Tsvetkov’s signal during Round-Table
II that the GOB is interested in MFN, and the Deputy Secretary’s
indication that we would be willing to discuss our laws and policies
pertaining thereto, may have set the stage for subsequent GOB efforts
to establish a dialogue on this issue. However, Tsvetkov and his col-
leagues must have realized that we do not contemplate any early
movement on MFN.
Confidential. Drafted by Glenn and Gilmore; cleared by Schmidt; approved by Vest.
2 Tsvetkov participated in two roundtable discussions at the Department. The first,
chaired by Vest, discussed international issues, in particular détente and the CSCE
process, but also disarmament, the Middle East, and U.S. normalization of relations with
the People’s Republic of China. The second roundtable, chaired by Vine, discussed
Southern Africa and Balkan developments, as well as bilateral relations, trade, chancery
sites, and divided families. The Department reported the discussions in telegram 291476
to Sofia, November 16. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,

Bulgaria
5. Chancery site—The prospects for movement in this area may
have been enhanced. Although Tsvetkov exaggerated the condition of
the Bulgarian Chancery and Ambassador Grigorov’s residence (the
roof did not fall in during Grigorov’s reception for Tsvetkov), the GOB
is concerned and therefore anxious to obtain a lease on two lots in the
Van Ness Street International Center. The GOB now should have no
doubt about our concern over its cooperation with Embassy Sofia in
resolving the Chancery problem there. Tsvetkov described the Chan-
cery problem as “technical”, not “political”, hopefully indicating
thereby that the GOB will soon take steps to resolve the problem.
6. Bulgarian concerns—Gotsev commented in private that the GOB
really dislikes our position on divided families and our linkage of the
US and Bulgarian Chancery problems. Tsvetkov indicated during the
second round-table session that it seemed as though we began every
discussion by referring to divided families. We have the impression
that the Bulgarians may have decided to go slow in resolving divided
family cases, an area of clear interest to us, until we have demonstrated
a willingness to move ahead in areas of interest to them.
7. Many thanks to Embassy Sofia for its assistance in arranging
Tsvetkov’s visit. We hope that it will help make your work easier.
Vance

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
90.
Memorandum From the Chief of the National Foreign
Intelligence Center, Central Intelligence Agency ([name not
declassified]) to the Deputy Director of the Bureau of
European Affairs, Department of State (Gilmore)1
Washington, February 6, 1979
SUBJECT
Could Bulgaria Go the Way of Romania? [classification not declassified]
Dear Harry,
1. The notion that Bulgaria might strike out on a course independ-
ent of the Soviet Union is a titillating one. Geographically separated
from the USSR and with no Soviet troops stationed on its soil, the
country would seem to be in a felicitous position to do so. One can
further argue that, economically faring no better and receiving no
greater economic help than Moscow’s other East European allies,
Bulgaria would seem to have been ill-rewarded for its fealty to the
USSR over the years. Its current disagreement with the USSR over
the future direction of its economic development would be a motive
for striking out on its own now. [classification not declassified]
2. A number of factors, nevertheless, argue that the Zhivkov regime
would have less inclination to dispute the Soviets than had the three
Balkan communist states who now shun Soviet hegemony. The Bulgar-
ian leadership was placed in power by the Soviets; it did not assume
power by virtue of its only military prowess (Albania & Yugoslavia),
nor did it achieve power only after purging those leaders the Soviets
imposed upon them (Romania). The Bulgarians have no latent territo-
rial disputes with the USSR (Romania). To the contrary, Russia has
usually been seen as a protector of the Bulgarian state against its tradi-
tional enemies (Romania, Turkey, Greece). The USSR is now probably
viewed as its protector against the Serbs who—when viewed from
Sofia—are probably seen as coveting Pirin Macedonia. [classification not
declassified]
Romania?. Confidential. The salutation is handwritten. Telegram 555 from Bucharest,
January 27, is attached but not printed. In the telegram, the Embassy reported on a
meeting between the Deputy Chief of Mission and the French Counselor. The French
diplomat, discussing the results of Brezhnev’s visit to Sofia, suggested that Bulgaria
might be in position similar to early 1960s Romania, when increasing disagreements
with Moscow over the direction and pace of development led Bucharest to distance
itself from Soviet policies. The Embassy concluded that, if disagreements between Sofia
and Moscow existed, they would be evident in Bulgarian policy toward the Balkans.

Bulgaria
3. The advice the Soviets are giving the Bulgarians—to devote
greater attention to agriculture and light industry—is good advice.
And it may be recognized as good advice, even though it would not
have been so seen in 1961 when it was offered to the Romanians. In
the early 60s, we should recall, it was an article of ideological faith
that every communist state should go through a process of forced
industrialization comparable to that which the USSR went through.
When the Soviets then counseled the Romanians not to seek all-round
industrial development, they seemed to be saying that Romania should
not aspire to the developed-nation status that the Soviets were willing
to accord almost all the other states of Eastern Europe. Romania had
a good raw materials and energy resources base, which must have
made the advice seem all the more ill-intentioned. [classification not
declassified]
4. Autarchic economic development has long since been recognized
in Eastern Europe as a goal too expensive to be pursued. Bulgaria,
with its poor resource base, must appreciate that it is among the least
qualified to pursue it. Bulgaria has already attempted a speedy indus-
trialization on the basis of Soviet support and of heavy borrowing in
the West. It must now appreciate that there are limits to what the
Soviets can, or should, be expected to do in support of Bulgarian
industrialization, and it is deeply in hock to the West. In sum, the
wellsprings of the Bulgarian drive for industrialization are probably
not nearly as strong as those that impelled Romania into a confrontation
with the Soviets in the early 1960s. [classification not declassified]
5. We must, finally, face up to the circumstance that it is the Bulgari-
ans, not the Soviets, who are currently the demanders. Does it follow
that, because the Soviets will not give the Bulgarians all they want, the
Bulgarians will basically modify their policy on alliance with the USSR?
Is there no chance that the Soviets will yet make concessions of the sort
that have satisfied the Bulgarians before—e.g., the third metallurgical
complex? To whom would the Bulgarians turn instead of the Soviets?
Have they not done about as much as they can in terms of borrowing
and trading with the West? Does it not make more sense that what
we are witnessing is a negotiating process in which the Bulgarians are
presenting maximum demands and are prepared to settle for consider-
ably less? [classification not declassified]
6. This line of analysis, of course, places me in that group of Ameri-
can analysts “satisfied with the eternal status quo,” and I do not feel
comfortable there. But as I survey the balance sheet of possible stimuli
for Bulgaria’s standing pat or striking out on a more independent
course, the bottom line favors the former, in my judgment. We must
also remember, I think, that, as not all the peoples of the Balkans were
dissatisfied with Ottoman rule, so it may just be that some now see

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
their primary interests as being served through close alliance with the
USSR.2 [classification not declassified]
relations lie at the heart of Bulgarian foreign—and internal—affairs.” The Embassy
concluded: “close Bulgarian-Soviet relations stem from a very substantial congruence
of perceived political and economic interests, ideological and personal leadership ties,
all resting on a long tradition of historical and cultural association. The Bulgarian leaders
establish their own internal and external policies based on Bulgarian interests as they
see them—and in most cases they see such interests best served by close association
with the Soviet Union and support of Soviet policies. This fact gives a greater strength
to their cooperation and alliance than is true of the bilateral relations of most if not all
of the other Soviet allies with the USSR.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
Policy File, D790252–0784)
91.
Telegram From the Embassy in Bulgaria to the Department
of State1
1233. Subject: (S) Bulgarian Approach on Closer Relations With
US. Ref: Sofia 1185.2
1. (S-entire text.)
2. Summary: Bulgarian Foreign Minister Mladenov’s comments
on Bulgarian-American relations reported reftel are regarded by the
Bulgarian side as an important political approach to the US for closer
relations. This approach was personally authorized by President/Party
Chief Todor Zhivkov, and following the meeting Mladenov remarked
to a senior MFA official that: “I hope the Americans realize that I have
extended my hand, and grasp it.” While not intending to depart from
close alignment with the Soviet Union, Bulgaria wishes to play a more
Secret; Priority; Limdis. Sent for information to Belgrade, East Berlin, Bucharest, Budapest,
Moscow, Prague, and Warsaw.
sions between Garthoff and Mladenov during their May 23 meeting. (National Archives,
the Embassy reported the international issues portion of their discussion, including SALT
II, China, and the Middle East. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
D790240–0762). For the account in his memoirs, see Raymond Garthoff, A Journey through
the Cold War, pp. 319–321.

Bulgaria
independent role, and specifically would like to upgrade relations with
the US. End summary.
3. Following the Ambassador’s meeting with Mladenov reported
reftel, Ambassador Gotsev (Chief of MFA Fourth Department responsi-
ble for relations with US and Western Europe) arranged a private
luncheon tete-a-tete with the Ambassador. In an unusually open and
frank discussion, Gotsev emphasized the Bulgarian leadership’s desire
to raise substantially the level and range of its relations with the US.
He stated that Mladenov, himself a member of the Politburo, had
in advance discussed with President Zhivkov his meeting with the
Ambassador, and had been authorized to seek closer political and
economic ties with the US. Mladenov considered the Ambassador’s
return to Washington for consultations at this juncture as the best
opportunity to make an authoritative probe of the American reaction,
and he was awaiting with interest whatever the Ambassador would
be able to bring back by way of a response. Following his meeting
with the Ambassador, Mladenov had told Gotsev: “I hope the Ameri-
cans realize that I have extended my hand, and grasp it.”
4. Gotsev commented that the US was of course the most important
country in the world. Bulgaria enjoyed very close ties with the Soviet
Union, and had no wish to change that relationship. At the same time,
some of the Bulgarian leaders, including Zhivkov as well as Mladenov,
wished to increase the role which Bulgaria herself plays in world affairs.
They had no illusions as to the limited role which a small country
could aspire to. Nonetheless, Bulgaria’s role in the Balkans could be
of some significance to the US as well. Moreover, while Bulgaria had
been extending its political contacts and economic ties with other West-
ern countries, in particular the FRG and increasingly Japan, this had
not so far developed with respect to the US.
5. Gotsev stated that some members of the Bulgarian leadership
were frankly skeptical as to whether the US shared an interest in
improving relations. Also, some members of the leadership through
their own particular experience represented in effect “a (West) German
lobby” and a “Japanese lobby”—there was no “American lobby” yet.
He commented that whenever a major trade deal with a Western part-
ner was being decided upon by the leadership, Zhivkov would ask
about the quality of technology compared with that of the US; while
differences obviously existed among various advanced countries, the
basic benchmark was normally taken to be the US.
6. Gotsev stated that despite Bulgaria’s close economic relations
with the Soviet Union, and with other members of Comecon, there is
a potential for increased economic ties with the West—and preferably
with the US. The Bulgarian leadership was not at all satisfied with the
stagnation of Bulgarian-American trade at a relatively low level and
limited scope.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
7. Gotsev stressed Bulgarian interest in obtaining MFN treatment
from the US. He expressed the hope which the Bulgarian leadership
has that with SALT II and the development of American-Chinese politi-
cal and now economic ties it would prove possible for Bulgaria to
acquire MFN status. He stated that Bulgaria wishes to gain MFN before
Czechoslovakia or the German Democratic Republic. Moreover, he
commented, Bulgaria in fact had no emigration problem with a Jewish
minority or other group. Such essentially minor differences as divided
family cases could rapidly be resolved.
8. Gotsev noted (as had Mladenov) that the Bulgarians had taken
a number of concrete steps suggested by the American side, such as
the settlement of the claims of American bondholders, and there were
none of the other obstacles that might stand in the way: no Bulgarian
gold in the US, no unsatisfied claims, or other such issues. Yet the
American side had made clear last year that it was not prepared at
that time to move on MFN.3
9. The Ambassador noted that Romania and Hungary had qualified
for MFN on the basis of existing legislation. He agreed with Gotsev
that there were no specific intrinsic obstacles in the way of reaching
agreement. Was Bulgaria prepared and interested to seek an MFN
solution on the Hungarian pattern?4 The Ambassador noted that he
was of course aware that after the Morse report, and the visit by Deputy
Foreign Minister Tsvetkov and Gotsev himself to Washington last fall,
there had been a distinct falling off of Bulgarian private expressions
of interest in taking steps toward MFN. The Ambassador then stated
that he wished to ask directly an undiplomatic question: had Bulgaria
consulted with the Soviet Union in 1978 before hiring an American
law firm to investigate MFN prospects, and before expressing the inter-
est which Gotsev himself and other Bulgarian officials had expressed
to the Ambassador with respect to the “Hungarian solution” and Bul-
garian interest in MFN?
10.GotsevrepliedthattheexpressionsofinterestinMFNwerebased
on the judgment of the Bulgarian leadership that obtaining MFN status
from the US, for economic and political reasons, would serve Bulgarian
interests. At the same time, they wished to proceed discreetly and delib-
erately. While prepared to justify their interest, they did not want to dis-
play this interest and then have it rebuffed by the US, in front of the
otherSocialistcountries.GotsevemphasizedthatBulgariaalsocouldnot
3 See Document 89.
4 PD–21 established the yardstick by which improved relations, including extension
of MFN, would be either an independent foreign policy from the Soviet Union (i.e.
Romania and Yugoslavia) or a policy of internal liberalization (the Hungarian model).
See Document 16.

Bulgaria
appear to be taking the initiative in raising the issue, although in fact
they had done so. He said specifically some version of what he termed
“the Hungarian variant” was not rpt not out of the question. Gotsev then
continuedbycommentingthattheBulgarianreadingfromtheAmbassa-
dor’s own statements after his return from consultations in the fall of
1978, and their assessment based on the conversations (with Tsvetkov
and himself) in Washington, as well as the Morse report suggested the
time was not ripe to pursue the matter. Now, they hoped the changed
international circumstances to which he had alluded might make it
appropriate—if not immediately, at least in some time frame they could
take into account in making their own decisions.
11. Gotsev also noted the importance of decisions taken in the
course of developing the next five-year plan. He said that if some
projects and investments could not be undertaken with American firms,
or with other Western countries, they would have to depend on Soviet
assistance. (While not specifically stated, Gotsev implied both that
heavier reliance on Soviet economic assistance was for one or another
reason less desired, and perhaps not always forthcoming.)
12. Gotsev remarked that the Bulgarians had very little to offer the
US in a concrete way. They had already made a number of steps, and
frankly had little left to bargain with. But the specific matters which
the Ambassador had raised with Mladenov, for example, could all
easily be taken care of. There were, however, those in the leadership
who felt that without reciprocal moves or signs of a more forthcoming
American view that the Bulgarian side had already made perhaps more
concessions in advance that it should have. In addition to MFN, Gotsev
(as had Mladenov) stressed the importance of higher level political
contacts and higher level American visits to Bulgaria. While the Bulgari-
ans certainly did not expect, for example, a visit by the American
President at any time in the near future, they would hope to have
cabinet-level visits—perhaps first the Secretary of Commerce, and in
due course the Secretary of State. More immediately, they very much
hoped that the US would respond to their repeated invitations and
expressions of interest in early visits and regular consultations picking
up from the Tsvetkov visit. They very much hoped that Assistant
Secretary Vest could visit Bulgaria this year. In addition, the Foreign
Minister—and not he alone—was well aware that he was the only
Eastern European Foreign Minister who had not yet had the opportu-
nity to meet with Secretary Vance.
13. As to other possibilities for an American sign of interest in
developing closer relations, Gotsev remarked that the one concrete step
which would have some symbolic as well as intrinsic value would be
an increase in the Bulgarian fishing quota in American waters. He
hoped that the Ambassador could bring back some good news in that

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
respect. The Ambassador replied that he would certainly look into the
possibility further, but reiterated—as he had to the Foreign Minister—
that regrettably this was a matter beyond the decision of the State
Department and quotas were determined in accordance with available
supply, conservation needs, and specific reciprocal tradeoffs with other
countries responsible for waters of interest to American fishermen.
Gotsev indicated that he realized this fact, but he hoped that nonethe-
less perhaps something could be done—perhaps reducing slightly the
quota reserved for American fishermen. The Ambassador noted that
would present a domestic political problem of some size.
14. Gotsev stated that Mladenov had expressed satisfaction with
his exchanges with the Ambassador on other (than bilateral) world
developments. Specifically, he said that he “got the message” (sic) on
(the American view of) the Macedonian issue. Gotsev stressed that
Mladenov scarcely ever had such frank discussions with Ambassadors,
and never with an American Ambassador. He had high confidence in
the Ambassador. In response, the Ambassador replied that he always
found interesting and useful such discussions with the Foreign Minis-
ter, and this comprehensive recent one in particular. He appreciated
the Minister’s other comments, and believed they do indeed have good
rapport and mutual understanding. Gotsev said that the Minister was
looking forward to talking with the Ambassador after his return.
15. Comment: Foreign Minister Mladenov’s three-hour review of
the development of Bulgarian-relations with the Ambassador, followed
by the evidently orchestrated informal elucidation by Ambassador Got-
sev, is a clear signal and request for an American response. Gotsev
said explicitly what a Communist Foreign Minister (and Politburo
member) could not say in such a direct and open way. They do not
expect far-reaching or immediate American moves on such major issues
as MFN, but they do want to know whether the United States is recep-
tive to the Bulgarian interest in enhancing our relations. They indicated
(Gotsev explicitly) that one reason for Bulgarian interest is to establish
a more independent, though not necessarily less Soviet-aligned, and
albeit still modest, Bulgarian role in world affairs.
16. As the Ambassador is returning imminently to Washington, he
will give his personal comments and recommendations on the ques-
tions posed by the Bulgarians reported above and in the reftel during
his consultations.
Garthoff

Bulgaria
92.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
Bulgaria1
255319. Subject: Vance-Zhivkova Bilateral.
1. (C-entire text)
2. Summary. Secretary held bilateral talks with Bulgarian UNGA
delegation head Lyudmila Zhivkova September 26. Bulgarian partici-
pants were Ambassador Grigorov, Permanent Representative to the
UN Yankov, and interpreter. US participants were Counselor Nimetz,
Assistant Secretary Vest, Ambassador-designate Perry and EUR/EE
Deputy Director Gilmore (notetaker). Both sides expressed a desire to
improve relations, and the upcoming visit of Assistant Secretary Vest
and the CSCE consultations in November were seen as concrete steps
in this direction. Zhivkova invited the Secretary to visit Bulgaria at a
time convenient to him, and the Secretary expressed the hope that he
could accept it at some point. End summary.
3. After an exchange of pleasantries including references by Mme.
Zhivkova to her brief social meetings with President and Mrs. Carter
and Vice President Mondale, during her June 1977 visit here, Mme.
Zhivkova expressed satisfaction that she had been given the opportu-
nity to conduct Bulgaria’s first official UNGA discussions with the
Secretary. Welcoming the opportunity to hold bilateral talks with GOB
representatives, the Secretary expressed appreciation for Foreign Minis-
ter Mladenov’s statements to Ambassador Garthoff about the GOB’s
desire to improve bilateral relations.2 He also welcomed the GOB’s
action to resolve divided family cases. The Secretary indicated that
Ambassador-designate Perry, a colleague in whom he had great confi-
Confidential; Immediate. Drafted by Gilmore; cleared by Vest, Frasure, and Bremer;
approved by Raphel.
2 See Document 91. The Bulgarian Government and the Embassy in Sofia renewed
calls for a bilateral between the two Foreign Ministers in 1979. Grigorov called on
Assistant Secretary Vest June 29 to discuss the state of relations between the two countries.
Stressing the improvement in relations, Vest promised “he would do everything possible
to arrange a meeting” between Vance and Mladenov. (Telegram 173956 to Sofia, July 5;
Embassy in Sofia also recommended a meeting, stressing that “a Vance/Mladenov
meeting is long overdue.” (Telegram 1802 from Sofia, July 31; National Archives, RG
scheduled, the Embassy informed the Department that Mladenov was to accompany
Zhivkov to Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia. (Telegram 2193 from Sofia, September 12;

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
dence, would be discussing with the GOB specific ways in which we
might improve relations.
4. Zhivkova expressed GOB’s satisfaction that US-Bulgarian re-
lations had improved and deepened since the signature of Helsinki
Final Act. She stated that there are no “weighty” outstanding issues
between the US and Bulgaria, and indicated that a Bulgarian represent-
ative would come to the US soon to sign a document resolving financial
problems which date back to the 1930’s. (N.B. Zhivkova was apparently
alluding to a final settlement with US holders of Kingdom of Bulgaria
bonds.) US and Bulgarian leaders, said Zhivkova, owe it to their
peoples to develop bilateral relations further. The GOB is conscious
of the fact that US is a huge country and a great power with vast
resources and human potential. Bulgaria, although very small, has a
rich historical and cultural heritage. A crossroads between East and
West, Bulgaria survived 500 years under Ottoman bondage and has
become a developed and vigorous country. Every country must make
its contribution to a better future for the world and the contribution
of Bulgaria, as a small country, must be qualitative rather than quantita-
tive. Bulgaria, said Zhivkova, is ready to make its contribution to all
aspects of relations including trade and scientific-technical and cultural
cooperation.
5. The Secretary agreed that the US and Bulgaria should strive to
find more common ground in their relations. He expressed support
for continuing US-Bulgarian contacts in the CSCE context and noted
that we will hold CSCE consultations with Bulgaria this fall.
6. One area of relations which remains to be settled, said Zhivkova,
is that of trade and economic cooperation. Relations in this area should
be put on a stable basis, and the issue of MFN should be considered
in this context. The Secretary asked Ambassador-designate Perry to
explore on his behalf concrete ways of improving relations in this
sphere.
7. Zhivkova welcomed Ambassador-designate Perry to Sofia. She
noted that the GOB has recognized Ambassador Garthoff’s work in
improving relations by giving him the award of the Madara Horseman,
First Class.3 The Secretary thanked Zhivkova for honoring Ambassador
Garthoff, observing that this award reflected Bulgaria’s desire to
improve relations.
8. The Secretary expressed particular satisfaction that Assistant
Secretary Vest, his “strong right arm”, would be visiting Bulgaria next
month. Zhivkova welcomed the Vest visit as an expansion of contacts
3 For his account of the award, see Raymond Garthoff, My Journey through the Cold
War, p. 323.

Bulgaria
between the US and Bulgaria and expressed the hope that contacts
such as this would lead to the further development of relations.
9. On behalf of Foreign Minister Mladenov, Zhivkova invited the
Secretary to visit Bulgaria at a time convenient to him. The Secretary
thanked her for the invitation and expressed the hope that he would
be able to accept it at some point. Noting that Bulgaria would celebrate
its 1300th anniversary as a state in 1981, Zhivkova indicated that a visit
to Bulgaria then would enable the Secretary to join in the celebration.
Bulgarian UN Ambassador Yankov quickly added that if the Secretary
could come sooner, then so much the better.
Vance
93.
Memorandum From Stephen Larrabee of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, October 29, 1979
SUBJECT
Meeting with Lyuben Gotsev (U)
Attached is the memcon of the meeting which Marshall and I had
American Section of the Bulgarian MFA. As I suspected he would,
Gotsev did raise the issue of a meeting between Lyudmila Zhivkova
and the President and expressed disappointment that the President
had not been able to see her. He also made a strong pitch for MFN,
arguing that recent progress on family reunification and visas had
removed any remaining obstacles to Sofia obtaining MFN. (C)
I had the impression from the meeting with Gotsev that the Bulgari-
ans do genuinely desire an improvement in relations and that they feel
that they have met us more than halfway with the recent resolution
of the family reunification problems, etc.—a view shared by George
Vest as a result of his recent trip to Sofia. (C)
Brement, Blackwill, Rentschler, and Griffith. Brzezinski wrote at the top of the memoran-
dum: “Let’s explore a single initiative as a test. ZB.”
2 Brzezinski had approved the meeting with Gotsev on October 24.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
While granting Sofia MFN is clearly out of the question in the
immediate future, we should give serious consideration to what else
we might do to encourage Bulgaria’s interest in improved relations.
Despite Bulgaria’s close ties to the Soviet Union, the prospects for some
change over the long run may not be as dismal as often assumed. The
rejuvenation in the Bulgarian leadership which has taken place since
1976 combined with a prolonged succession crisis in the Soviet Union
could induce Bulgaria to pursue a moderately more flexible policy in
areas where this does not fundamentally contradict Soviet interests.
This was the case in 1964 at the time of Khrushchev’s ouster (when
Bulgaria came close to normalizing relations with Bonn and took a
number of other uncharacteristically independent initiatives in the Bal-
kans) and it is not inconceivable that a similar development could
occur in the immediate post-Brezhnev period. (C)
In short, while we should have no illusions about the degree of
Bulgaria’s dependence on the Soviet Union, we should not write off
Bulgaria entirely. We should do what we can to encourage Bulgaria
to broaden its ties with the West and test Sofia’s willingness to improve
relations with the United States (perhaps by including Bulgaria in a
trip by a Cabinet official at some point). (C)
Attachment
Memorandum of Conversation3
SUBJECT
Summary of Meeting with Lyuben Gotsev (U)
PARTICIPANTS
Marshall Brement
Stephen Larrabee
Lyuben Gotsev, Head, North American Section, Bulgarian MFA
Krassin Himmirsky, First Secretary, Bulgarian Embassy
Elena Bobtodorova, Interpreter
Gotsev opened the meeting by stating he wished to concentrate
on bilateral relations. He proceeded to review the state of US-Bulgarian
relations, pointing to progress in the resolution of 20 of the 35 pending
family reunification cases in the last several months and progress in
3 Confidential. The meeting took place in Brement’s office.

Bulgaria
visa applications. He stated that the meeting between Foreign Minister
Mladenov and Ambassador Garthoff in May was an important indica-
tion of Bulgarian’s interest in improving relations with the United
States.4 Assistant Secretary Vest’s visit this week had also contributed
to the improvement of relations.5 Bulgaria wanted to see this process
strengthened, but it often had the impression that the United States
was not really interested in such a development. (C)
Gotsev then made a strong pitch for MFN, arguing that with the
recent resolution of many family reunification cases there were no
longer any meaningful obstacles to Bulgaria receiving MFN. He asked
how we saw the prospects for Bulgaria receiving MFN. (C)
Gotsev also pointed to the current visit to the US of Lyudmila
Zhivkova, daughter of Bulgarian President Todor Zhivkov and a mem-
ber of the Politburo, as an indication of Bulgaria’s interest in improving
relations. Mme. Zhivkova had met with Secretary Vance at the UNGA
in New York and had met with Secretary Harris, Mrs. Mondale, and
John Reinhardt in Washington.6 He regretted, however, that Mme.
Zhivkova had been unable to be received by the President despite the
many attempts by the Bulgarian Government to get an appointment. (C)
In response, Messrs. Brement and Larrabee stated that Foreign
Minister Mladenov’s meeting with Ambassador Garthoff and the
progress in the resolution of family reunification cases had been duly
noted in Washington. We were encouraged by this trend and hoped
it would continue. As to a meeting between Zhivkova and the President,
we pointed out that the President was extremely busy; that he normally
met only Heads of State, even of our closest allies; that October was
the busiest month of the year for him; and that the request had come
at the last moment. Under such conditions, it was hardly realistic to
expect that it would be granted. Moreover, there had only recently
been a slight improvement in relations. Before a meeting with the
President could be realistically considered, relations would have to
develop further. We stressed that the US would like to see a positive
development of relations, but that this would depend upon concrete
4 For Garthoff’s meeting with Mladenov, and his subsequent discussion with Gotsev,
see Document 91.
Mrs. Mondale, and USICA Director Reinhardt were found. In a memorandum to Brzezin-
ski dated October 6, Tarnoff recommended that Joan Mondale meet Zhivkova at the
White House since it would be viewed in Sofia as “another favorable response to its
recent moves to improve relations with us.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs,
memorandum with its concurrence to Denis Clift on October 9. (Ibid.)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
steps that the Bulgarian Government was willing to undertake in the
coming months and years. (C)
On MFN Messrs. Brement and Larrabee pointed to the fact that
there were certain legislative requirements which had to be met in
order for Bulgaria to qualify for MFN. In our view, all possibilities had
not been exhausted within the existing framework. However, we were
prepared to discuss with Bulgaria what requirements would have to
be met in order to qualify for MFN. (C)
Returning to the question of bilateral relations, Gotzev noted the
apparent US lack of interest in improving relations with Bulgaria. In
his view the Bulgarians had been forthcoming on issues of concern to
the US, but the US seemed to be making a change in its policy
conditional on a change in Bulgaria’s relations with the Soviet Union.
The US should recognize that these ties were deep and long-standing,
and he argued that we should not make a disruption or cessation
of these prerequisites for an improvement of US-Bulgarian bilateral
relations. Bulgaria was an independent country and US-Bulgarian
relations should stand on their own merits. Concluding, he noted that
Secretary Vance would be visiting Yugoslavia and Romania in Decem-
ber and expressed the hope that Bulgaria could be included in his
travel plans in the near future.7 (C)
In response, Messrs. Brement and Larrabee said that the US recog-
nized Bulgaria’s strong ties with the Soviet Union and that we did not
make a cessation of these ties a prerequisite for improved relations
with the United States. Our main concern was that the Bulgarians
pursue a policy which accorded with their own national interests. This
did not mean that we expected Bulgaria to break all ties with the Soviet
Union. We understood that these ties were deep and long-standing.
Nonetheless, we hoped that there could be more common ground on
a number of issues between our two countries in the future and that
if this occurred, it would have a positive effect on bilateral relations. (C)
7 Vance was scheduled to visit Bucharest and Belgrade in mid-December 1979. The
trip was canceled at the last minute, however, due to the developing Iran hostage crisis.

Bulgaria
94.
Memorandum From the Former Ambassador to Bulgaria
(Garthoff) to the Assistant Secretary of State for European
Affairs (Vest)1
Washington, December 28, 1979
SUBJECT
Some Departing Observations on American Policy Toward Bulgaria and Eastern Europe
As I reflect on my recent service as Ambassador to Bulgaria,2 I
wish to offer several comments on our policy approach to Eastern
Europe, and specifically to Bulgaria. While I believe our general objec-
tives are sound, the guidance on specific policy implementation seems
to me too constricting.
Policy Guidance
American policy toward the Communist countries of Eastern
Europe has not changed basically for some years, and the gradual
evolutionary change which has occurred has generated very little public
(or, for that matter, internal governmental) debate—save for the brou-
haha over the so-called “Sonnenfeldt doctrine” in 1976.
Some of us did consider that the policy established by the last
sively rigid and constraining. “With regard to the Eastern European
countries generally,” it stated, “progress in the economic area should
be made contingent on satisfactory political conduct on international
issues involving our interests and on a demonstrated willingness to
solve outstanding bilateral political problems.” Progress on bilateral
relations alone was not regarded as sufficient. But there was a further
“chain” linkage:
The NSDM laid down a clear rank ordering of the Eastern European
countries in the eyes of the US Government, irrespective both of “politi-
cal conduct” and of resolution of bilateral problems by each country.
European Affairs, Bulgaria Desk, Personal Files of Retired Ambassador to Bulgaria,
Secret. The date is handwritten. Copies were sent to Nimetz, Barry, Schmidt, and Gilmore.
Printed from Garthoff’s copy.
replaced by Jack Perry on October 17.
a ranking among the Eastern European regimes. For the text of NSDM 212, see Foreign
ment 8.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
For commercial agreements (recognized as the principal “carrot”), a
set order of priority was prescribed: Romania, then Hungary, then
Czechoslovakia, and then Bulgaria. (Settlement of the claims of Ameri-
can bondholders was also called for, and was the only specific prerequi-
site for MFN and Export-Import Bank loans.) Similarly, cultural and
scientific exchange agreements (where not already established) were
required to reflect the same rank order: Hungary, then Czechoslovakia,
and only then Bulgaria.
under the present Administration, established “a new order” for our
relations with countries of Eastern Europe. Rather than explicitly link-
ing progress in bilateral economic and good relations to “satisfactory
political conduct on international issues,” the new approach was keyed
to the twin aims of enhancing international independence and increas-
ing internal liberalization. “To that end,” the Directive read, “the United
States will demonstrably (sic) show its preference for Eastern European
countries that are either relatively liberal internally or relatively inde-
pendent internationally.” In addition, a new order of priorities was
set: The first group comprised Poland and Romania, with Hungary to
be raised to that same level; as the second group: “Relations with
Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia and the GDR will remain limited until there
is demonstrated progress along one of the two dimensions mentioned
above.” No “initiatives” would be taken toward these three, and any
steps to improve relations with any of them “must tangibly and
demonstrably advance specific US interests.” Also, finally, there were
to be no “indications of willingness to grant MFN.”
The objectives of encouraging greater external independence and
greater internal liberalization were newly articulated as basic policy,
although they had for years underlain our policy toward the area. On
theotherhand,whilenolongerlistingindividualcountriesinsetpriority
order, a distinction between the three for whom we would “demonstra-
bly” show a “preference,” and the other three, was sharply drawn.
A quite different note was struck by Secretary Vance on January
7, 1978,4 when publicly asked: “Is there any difference between the
policy of this Administration and the policy of the previous Administra-
tion towards the nations of Eastern Europe? And if there is a difference,
would you care to elucidate it?” The Secretary replied: “The current
Administration is seeking to improve its relationships with the coun-
tries of Eastern Europe. Each of us will have to approach this with our
own national interests involved. I think that the best way to deal with
4 Vance was in Budapest on January 7 to attend the ceremonies organized for the
official return of the Crown of St. Stephen to Hungary.

Bulgaria
these problems is to have face-to-face discussions where we can discuss
the differences and the common interests. We shall pursue these on
the basis of dealing on a case-by-case basis, country by country, on the
various issues and common concerns which we have.”
The distinction in PD–21 has not officially been made public,
although some news accounts have given its gist. Later public state-
ments of American policy toward Eastern Europe have been consistent
with PD–21, but have not disclosed its key elements either with respect
to objectives or to differentiation between two categories of countries,
favored and disfavored by the United States. These public statements
have also been consistent with Secretary Vance’s rather different case-
by-case approach. (The most comprehensive authoritative public state-
ment of policy was the testimony of Deputy Assistant Secretary Luers
on September 8, 1978, before the House International Relations Com-
mittee, distributed also as a State Department pamphlet, “Eastern
Europe: An overview.” Also important was Assistant Secretary Vest’s
statement before the House Subcommittee on Europe and the Middle
East on July 12, 1979, which explicitly reaffirmed that the Luers state-
ment “remains valid as a comprehensive account of U.S. policy and
objectives toward the region.”)
The annual development, both by the posts and through Washing-
ton coordination among interested agencies, of “U.S. Goals and Objec-
tives,” for the Ambassador to each country provides a useful opportu-
nity for some clarifications of policy guidance, but only up to a point.
Differences over the question of active promotion of MFN for Bulgaria,
for example, led to this minimalist implementation guidance statement:
“If Bulgaria requests, explain U.S. legislative requirements for MFN.”
The Foreign Service Inspection Report on The Conduct of Relations
with the Countries of Eastern Europe (May 1979), based on an inspection
of the operations of the EUR/EE Office in the Department and the
diplomatic posts in Eastern Europe, concluded that: “While the strategy
[of PD–21]5 is basically sound, it does appear to preclude U.S. Missions
in Sofia and Prague from exploiting certain opportunities to pursue
U.S. interests, and therefore should be reviewed.” The Department was
advised to “seek amendments to the Directive if it now appears too
restrictive.”
Policy Toward Bulgaria, 1977–1979
PD–21 was issued on the very day I flew from Washington to Sofia
to assume my mission. I was not made aware of drafts while being
briefed in Washington in July to September; I was aware of the general
5 Brackets in the original.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
trend of the policy line from a discussion with Dr. Brzezinski (but not
of the sharp division of countries into two groups nor of the confining
language on MFN for Bulgaria).
In 1978, I was advised by STADIS message (State 179410 of July
for Bulgaria, and replied (78 Sofia 2016, and with a series of “open”
September/October 1978, however, made clear to me that Washington
did not deem the season appropriate to pursue the matter, despite
Bulgarian interest and even possible responsiveness to legislative
requirements. The Bulgarians understood this in part from my more
cool attitude on the subject, and certainly after their own reconnaissance
in the Tsvetkov-Gotsev consultations in Washington in November 1978.
Foreign Minister Mladenov personally made a pitch for overall
improved relations, including their desire for MFN, in discussions with
that consideration was being given to negotiating a trade agreement, including possible
MFN status, with Bulgaria. Despite the lack of a decision to do so, and with no timetable
in mind for the negotiation, the Department suggested that the Embassy begin addressing
certain questions that would need to be addressed in case negotiations were to begin.
policies toward foreign travel by Bulgarian citizens, and the process of obtaining a
passport and exit visa from the country. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
reported on the status of CSCE implementation in Bulgaria, describing it as unsatisfactory.
from Sofia, September 25, 1978, the Embassy reported on the status of human rights
and minorities in Bulgaria. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
in seeking MFN status in order to gain increased access to the U.S. market. (National
between David Morse, partner at Surrey, Karasik, Morse, and Seham law offices in New
York, and Bulgarian officials. Morse was asked by the Bulgarian Government to prepare
a memorandum on what Bulgaria would need to do to obtain MFN. (National Archives,
1978, reported the discussions between Luers and Tzvetkov which also touched on the
outlook for MFN for Bulgaria. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
meeting between Luers and Bulgarian Deputy Foreign Trade Minister Ginev. (National

Bulgaria
and 1233).9 We were also given a broad hint that the Bulgarians had
not yet consulted with Moscow on their desire to obtain MFN possibly
even on the Hungarian model (79 Sofia 1233).
Since my return, the matter has again been raised by the Bulgarians
in discussions in general with you, I understand, and in particular
during Deputy Assistant Secretary Barry’s visit and the recent visit
here of Deputy Foreign Trade Minister Ginev (State 319388).10
The Issue
The purpose of this review is simply to highlight what I see as a
possible failure on our part to serve our own interests (and for that
matter the aims of PD–21), owing to the effects of its confining strictures
on our policy toward Bulgaria, above all against pursuing any line of
action involving a grant of MFN. I am aware that other factors—
especially attitudes on the Hill (or at least perceived attitudes), and
the woeful tangle of policy implementation concerning MFN for China
and the Soviet Union—may have counseled not raising the clearly
secondary matter of our relations with Bulgaria.
Nonetheless, I believe there is a good case to be made for seeking
to negotiate a trade agreement with Bulgaria involving MFN. First of
all, there is literally no other way the U.S. could wean Bulgaria even
a few degrees away from the USSR than to encourage her to take the
Romanian/Hungarian path to MFN qualification. (And, on a more
long-term calculation, by increasing trade we can reduce somewhat
Bulgaria’s heavy economic dependence on the USSR.) As I have
reported, Bulgarian relations with the Soviet Union, while destined to
remain close, are not those of a puppet—and economic differences
From the standpoint of “demonstrated progress” toward “relative”
independence, we should not expect or, therefore, even try to effect
that, in his meeting with Garthoff on May 23, Mladenov made a strong pitch for MFN
Telegram 1187 from Sofia, May 25, reported their discussion of international issues.
results of Deputy Foreign Trade Minister Ginev’s visit to Washington, which focused
on MFN and GATT. Schmidt suggested that the Bulgarians, while interested in MFN,
were unwilling to take the initiative out of concern over Soviet reaction. (National
countries were close, Bulgaria was not a Soviet puppet but rather a junior partner which
saw its interests very closely related to its larger ally. The Embassy also stressed that
there were instances in which the interests of the two countries diverged, and that the
United States could use those opportunities to move Bulgaria toward a more balanced

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
any major change in Bulgaria’s relationship with the Soviet Union.
(Again, see the analysis in 79 Sofia 1244). But neither have we seen
such a move in the case of Hungary. In terms of the other criterion,
relative internal liberalization, Bulgaria is not democratic or liberal,
but it is less repressive than the Soviet Union, Czechoslovakia and
probably Romania, and I would argue not really demonstrably less
liberal than Hungary in many respects (see 79 Sofia 2379,12 and the
not proceeded as far in economic “reform” as has Hungary, the Bulgari-
ans are moving—and are soliciting our advice (e.g., see 79 Sofia 0561
and accomplishment. The general standard of living is advancing, and
compares favorably with Romania.
Bilateral Relations
Bulgaria has been working to improve its relations with the U.S. The
Bulgarian leaders have also been making some effort to “earn” MFN.
Theyhaveresolved favorablythevastmajorityof dividedfamilycases—
only some 14 currently remain (out of twice that number still unresolved
only a few months ago). Moreover, they quietly and fully resolved the
sensitive case on which we placed greatest emphasis over the past two
years (Slavova). Their record on divided families is almost up to the
Hungarians, and much better than the Romanians. They agreed on
October 8, literally on the eve of my departure—a “going away” present,
the Minister of Finance told me—finally settling on favorable terms the
claims of private American bondholders, removing the last unresolved
problem of this kind. Bulgaria is, incidentally, the first Eastern European
country to resolve its foreign bondholders claims before a settlement
involving extensive MFN. We have, operating satisfactorily, the whole
panoply of normalized contacts and relations—a consular agreement
Report on Human Rights practices for Bulgaria. (National Archives, RG 59, Central
Foreign Policy File, D790449–0146)
to the U.S.-Bulgarian Economic Council, Deputy Prime Minister Andrei Lukanov asserted
that Bulgaria was embarking on a process of decentralization and modernization, and
outlined the expectations of the Bulgarian Government for the economy over the next
telegram 2377 from Sofia, September 1, the Embassy reported Garthoff’s farewell call
on Lukanov, in which the Deputy Prime Minister discussed Bulgarian foreign trade and

Bulgaria
elimination of travel restrictions on accredited diplomats (1977), a scien-
tific exchange agreement (1978), and an agricultural agreement (1979).
There are no obstacles in bilateral relations—no unsettled claims,
no prisoners, no gold or crowns. (There are also no Jewish or other
minorities discriminated against on emigration nor clamoring to leave.)
There is no Congressional or public lobby opposed in particular to
Bulgaria.
There are many aspects of Bulgarian internal and external policy
which we find objectionable, but not necessarily more than for Poland,
Romania, Hungary or China—or a number of non-communist countries
to whom we accord nondiscriminatory MFN trade status.
Thereareotherareasof bilateralandinternationalBulgariancooper-
ation worth noting. In interdiction of narcotics trafficking, for example,
there is close U.S.-Bulgarian cooperation (unlike our situation with the
USSR). Bulgaria apprehended, and returned to the Federal Republic,
German radical terrorists (unlike Yugoslavia). Bulgaria has refrained
from providingdirect military orpolice assistance and advisorsin Africa
and the Middle East (unlike East Germany). Incidentally, I several times
commented to Bulgarian leaders that it could not contribute to improv-
ing our bilateral relations if they were to embark on such programs;
whether that had any effect I do not know.
Concluding Comment
MFN is the only real matter which I see prejudiced by PD–21—and
the only area where I see opportunity for a useful American initiative
to serve the purposes of PD–21. That is why I have dealt with it at
such length. (I have larded the text with references, rather than repeat
relevant information and arguments, in an effort to be brief.)
I hope you and the Secretary will find occasion to consider one way
or another possible modification to the Directive or of its application.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
95.
Telegram From the Embassy in Bulgaria to the Department
of State1
2607. Subject: Questions About Bulgaria.
1. S-entire text.
2. What follows is an attempt, as I end my first year in Sofia, to
set down the most important current questions about Bulgaria, from
the viewpoint of American interests, and to give my frankest answers.
3. First, how solid is Bulgarian loyalty to Moscow?
4. Very solid. I see no sign of important change on the horizon, in
this respect. By and large, the relationship works well for Bulgaria’s
leaders, and the people accept it more readily than any other people
in Eastern Europe.2 Nevertheless it is good to remember that no rela-
tionship is eternal, that Bulgarians are less attached to Russia than is
commonly supposed, and that there are strains in the relationship (e.g.
on economic issues, on Soviet policy towards other East European
countries, on defense spending, on some foreign policy issues such as
Bulgaria’s Balkan policy) which could grow with time. And I do not
believe the Soviets have any infallible, ironclad system of keeping
Bulgaria loyal. Still, it would be wishful thinking to expect any early
deviation from the familiar pattern of loyalty to Moscow, and I expect
this pattern to continue for years.
5. Second, how secure is Zhivkov’s position?
6. Very secure. He seems in excellent health, in full vigor, and
benefits now from very long experience. In particular, he is senior
enough and canny enough to cope with any changes in the Kremlin.
(He seems to be in the process of decorating each Soviet Politburo
member, one by one, and observers here say his bets are placed on all
possible winners in the succession sweepstakes.) I am not aware of the
existence of meaningful opposition factions, although Lilov seems a
Secret. Sent for information to Belgrade, East Berlin, Bonn, Bucharest, Budapest, London,
Moscow, Paris, Prague, Vienna, Warsaw, West Berlin, and USNATO. On a copy found
in the Human Rights Bureau files, Hugh Simon (HA/EUR) wrote “Excellent Cable HS.”
(National Archives, RG 59, Bureau of Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs, 1980—
2 The Embassy reiterated the strength of the Soviet-Bulgarian relationship in tele-
gram 2352 from Sofia, September 4. While acknowledging that the ties between the two
countries were very strong, the Embassy wrote: “there are elements of Bulgarian national
pride which are not satisfied by the relationship with Moscow.” The Embassy concluded:
“US interests are best served by recognizing a Bulgarian identity apart from its ideological

Bulgaria
strong number two and a potential successor. The younger men in the
leadership seem able, relatively flexible, often well qualified technically
(especially the economists), and of course quite loyal to Zhivkov. There
may be some personnel changes at the April Party Congress, but I
would be surprised to see any major change in policy or direction. I
think Zhivkov has shaped a system he can control—and can control
the country with—until he dies or is incapacitated. So far I see no
thought given to a succession.
7. Third, how well will the economy function in the next five years?
8. Not badly, as far as overall growth is concerned, and probably
better comparatively than most of the countries of Eastern Europe.
This is a guess by a non-economist, but the leaders have several things
going for them: (a) Starting from such a low base in 1944, the Commu-
nist regime has been able to keep standards of living gradually rising to
the general (repeat general) satisfaction. This should continue, although
there are pockets of dissatisfaction. (b) Bulgarians are by and large an
accepting people, not rebellious, and in their Balkan way they manage
to get by all right even if supplies are limited and quality is low: they
grumble, but they carry on. (c) The planners are using their heads. The
Bulgarian new economic mechanism, somewhat like its Hungarian
namesake, has aspects of rationality which may take some of the edge
off the “Soviet model” insofar as Bulgaria is concerned. (d) Agriculture
seems to be working tolerably well, although distribution is lousy.
(e) There is enough corruption around—hard currency stores, winking
at illegal currency exchanges, bribes, semi-accepted ways of beating
the system—that almost everyone is coopted into the system by being
engaged in beating it. (f) By toning down their desires for all-round
industrialization, and accepting specialization within CEMA, the Bul-
garians strike me as showing signs (in contrast to, say, Romania) of
living within their means. Now all of the above could go sour, and I
am not saying there will not be difficulties. In fact the rising price of
oil, and the need for the USSR to continue to favor Bulgaria in providing
raw materials, is a fruitful field for disappointment and possible friction
with Russia. But in contrast to Czechoslovakia and Poland, where
any growth rate at all seems to be a pretty big deal nowadays, the
Bulgarians—a small country, only very recently industrialized—has
some hope of meeting its goals without undue strain.
9. Fourth, how secure is the Party’s position? Are there any alterna-
tive centers of power?
10. With Moscow’s continued support, and ruling out unexpected
disaster such as a real economic failure, I believe Party control is quite
firm. I do not believe the Communist regime has very deep roots into
the populace, however; many if not most Bulgarians accept their rulers
precisely to the extent that they have a personal stake in the system. It

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
is well to remember that while Russia always enjoyed great popularity
among the Bulgarian people, the country was in the Austro-Hungarian
or German sphere of influence for a good part of its history since 1878,
and the people overwhelmingly accepted alliance with Germany in
the two World Wars. In Czechoslovakia, I felt that the Czechs were a
Western people being held prisoner by the East; in Bulgaria, I feel that
the Bulgarians are a Balkan people who would swing with the wind
if Moscow ever loosened its hold. But so long as Moscow’s hold is
secure, the position of the Communists is also secure. As for alternative
centers of power, there are none now in existence to compare with the
Catholic Church in Poland, or with the potential for independence
among workers in Poland or Hungary. On the other hand, there is not
the fell hand of enforced uniformity that I gather one feels in Romania.
The Orthodox Church is used by the regime, but its independent exist-
ence keeps some thoughts alive of alternatives to Communist rule.
Even the puppet Agrarian Party serves something of the same purpose.
I suppose the answer is that if events ever loosened the Party’s hold
even somewhat, then the inclinations of the Bulgarians of pluralism
would rapidly grow and spread. In this sense—and in the sense that
it rules without the consent of the governed—the position of the Com-
munist Party here is firm, but fragile.
11. Fifth, how sound is the society?
12. I see a great deal of sickness, and hypocrisy, and disillusion.
In contrast to Prague, where I felt making the best of a fairly bad deal,
but they do not believe in the system or in their part in it. Corruption
is widespread, and cuts deeply. High living by the big shots is widely
known and resented. The workers are to a large extent bought off,
because—in a country which has largely industrialized itself over the
last thirty years—they have privileges, and their pay is comparatively
good. A huge proportion of this country moved to the towns and cities
since 1944, and whatever the shortcomings, they are finding life one
hell of a lot better than it was in a Balkan village before. As for the
intellectuals, they are also bought out by being treated well by the
regime—Zhivkov has been very clever at this—so that any potential
dissident is usually headed off with a sinecure or a reward. Bulgaria
is a rather old-fashioned country, with a lot of family life still going
on, and in this sense it is still sound. But much is changing, and fast,
and the system is based on deception and corruption. In this sense,
the stability of the society is also becoming more fragile.
13. Sixth, how good, and reliable, are the armed forces?
14. Bulgarians have been good fighters in history, they are patriotic,
and the soldiers would probably obey orders and acquit themselves
tolerably well. Their equipment is spotty, and the tasks they could
carry out are limited. In a general conflict, if they were to drive towards

Bulgaria
the Straits, they would probably, in my judgment, perform tolerably
well—especially with Soviet help—in a fairly quick, sustained effort.
But there are long histories of hatred with their Balkan neighbors, and
if the Bulgarians were fighting Yugoslavs, or Greeks, or Turks, or
Romanians, on the other fellow’s soil, I would expect their opponents
to outfight them man for man. I would have doubts about the reliability
of the Bulgarian armed forces in major tasks that took very long and
that went very far beyond their own frontiers. But if the Soviets assigned
them limited objectives, to be accomplished with decent equipment
over a short time span, I suspect they would do rather well. (This is
the opinion, of course, of a diplomat and not a military expert.) A
footnote to this is that I suspect there are strains over military expenses,
both within Bulgaria and with the USSR. I believe Zhivkov is sincere,
at least in part, in his constant speaking about the crying need for
reducing arms, and one element of this, I think, is the burden that arms
expenditures are on a small economy like Bulgaria’s.
15. Seventh, are there any variations possible in Bulgaria’s foreign
policy?
16. Not many, not soon. The conventional wisdom is that while
Sofia may complain about not getting enough Russian oil at the right
price, or about having to increase military expenditures, it is perfectly
happy to follow the Soviet lead in foreign policy in toto. (I carry in
my billfold, as constant reminder of where we stand in this respect,
Foreign Minister Mladenov’s statement of last January in Moscow that
Bulgarian and Soviet policy was identical “even to the nuances.”) Con-
ventional wisdom is not far from right, I fear, although it stands to
reason that the Bulgarians differ from the Russians sometimes on
foreign policy issues, especially those that affect Bulgarian interests,
and I assume that behind the scenes they are at least occasionally giving
the Soviets their views. I can give some examples of hypothetical areas
of divergence, but I cannot cite a single solid example of a difference
on the record between Sofia and Moscow, in foreign policy. (But least
the reader infer too much from that statement, let him try to think
of open foreign policy—repeat, foreign policy—differences between
Moscow and Budapest or Warsaw, not to mention Prague or East
Berlin.) I assume that Afghanistan has caused the Bulgarians a good
deal of discomfort, although their behavior has been loyal. They follow
the Soviet line towards the Italian and Spanish Communist Parties,
but I wonder if at times they would rather not have to do so. Most
importantly, Bulgarian aims in the Balkans do not always coincide
with Soviet aims, and we have evidence that the Bulgarians would like
to cooperate more in Balkan multilateral endeavors than the Soviets
have so far allowed. As for Yugoslavia, while outsiders often assume
that Sofia is merely Moscow’s catspaw, I think the Bulgarians have

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
their own aims and problems in their relations with Yugoslavia, and
they do not by any means always coincide with those of the Russians.
And in dealings with the West, the Bulgarians are more open and
lenient about Western influence, cultural or economic, than the Soviets
are happy to see, as I understand the situation. All of the above being
said, I still cannot point to any open difference in Soviet and Bulgarian
foreign policy, and do not expect to see any. I do believe, however,
that this strict loyalty has a price, both in bilateral stresses and strains,
and also in the amount Moscow must pay for Bulgaria’s continued
loyalty. I have a feeling—which I cannot prove—that Moscow will
have to pay a higher price for this loyalty as the years go by.
17. Eighth, are there any openings for the West?
18. Not too many, but more than most people think. The fact is
that Bulgaria has been neglected, largely written off, and the West has
invested very little here in money, or effort, or people. I am probably
the wrong one to bring it up, but the quality of Western Ambassadors
here has not always been topnotch, because Sofia is not considered an
important enough post. (This was not always the case in the past:
The British in particular have sent some first-rate diplomatists to the
Balkans, including Sofia.) Nowadays some countries find it hard to get
good quality young diplomats to agree to a tour in Sofia, so bad is its
reputation. (I do not believe this is true of our Service.) And along the
line, the quality of trade shows, cultural presentations, intellectual
exchanges, and the like tends to be lower than with most of the other
East European countries. For us and some of the other Western coun-
tries—especially the Germans, who have great opportunities here—
this is a mistake, for Bulgaria has more to offer than its stereotypes
say. Among the intellectuals, in business circles, in terms of popular
interest, an opportunity is there for the West to have more influence.
Especially in trade, the opportunity for a higher volume—with all the
political consequences that entails—is clearly present. The reader will
write all of the above off as a case of localitis, and I suppose my only
answer is, “Come and see.” In plain hard terms of realpolitik, there
are opportunities in Bulgaria which we should be exploiting.
19. Ninth, are any changes needed in US policy?
20. No, I believe we are on the right track. We have shown more
interest in Bulgaria in recent years, partly because we discovered it
was there, partly because the Bulgarians came out of their shells. In
the wake of Polish events, the going may become trickier, but I think
we should still go as far towards improving relations (I know the term
is vague, but I hope its meaning is clear) as the Bulgarians are willing
to go. I hope we will not try to fit Bulgaria into some formula that
places them carefully in relationship to Czechoslovakia or the GDR or
Poland. Bulgaria is Bulgaria, and I hope we will deal with it on its

Bulgaria
own terms. The loyalty to Moscow is firm, as I have said, but Bulgaria’s
pride in its own identity as a nation is also firm, and I believe the
manifestations of this pride are growing. (Next year’s 1300th anniver-
sary of Bulgarian statehood—an anniversary the Soviets still have kept
their distance from—is important in this respect.) In the field of trade,
I would hope the US Government—whose powers are limited, of
course, in the area—would do more to encourage US interest: I think
the potential is considerable and if the MFN thing is raised by the
Bulgarians, we should of course be willing to talk sympathetically.
Meanwhile some more high-level visits would pay a good return on
the investment of time. But in general, I would say our policy, of
responding to a limited amount of opportunity, has been correct, and
remains so.
21. Tenth, finally, how important to US interests is Bulgaria?
22. Not very. Not so long as conditions remain about as they are
now, with the present leadership in place and with loyalty to Moscow
the sine qua non of Bulgarian policy. I would add only that Bulgaria’s
geophysical position is quite important, and since she is the only non-
contiguous-to-Russia member of the Warsaw Pact, her position is some-
what vulnerable. As I have said, I see signs that the price of keeping
Bulgaria totally loyal to Moscow is rising, and by the same token I see
the potential for Western influence susceptible of increase. If Moscow
goes on the defensive, to put it bluntly, Sofia becomes a prime target.
And since we should be thinking ahead, perhaps more attention to
Bulgaria now would be justified.
Perry

Czechoslovakia
96.
Telegram From the Embassy in Czechoslovakia to the
Department of State1
235.
Subject:
Charter
77—Implications
for
US-Czechoslovak
USNATO 0294.2
1. Efforts of the Czechoslovak regime to suppress the dissidents
who have banded together under “Charter 77” in order, inter alia, to
focus world attention on their demands for basic human rights will
inevitably affect US-Czechoslovak relations. So far, the direct impact
of this regime-dissident confrontation on the United States has been
confined mainly to crude and close surveillance of visiting Washington
Post correspondent Michael Getler (ref A),3 evident commencement
of harassment of US Fulbright Prof. Begnal, and slight increase in
surveillance of some Embassy personnel. Our difficulties regarding
Czechoslovak media and in attempting to improve Embassy contacts
remain about the same as before the Charter 77 affair began. If the
intimidation campaign continues, however, and especially if criminal
charges are filed against more people for the sin of seeking rights
specified in Czechoslovak law, it cannot help but directly conflict with
broad US interests in championing human rights everywhere and in
seeing that progress is made in this field at Belgrade 77.
2. During the past year, we made some significant, albeit limited,
progress in improving relations with Czechoslovakia—in achieving an
agreed text of a scientific cultural exchanges agreement, ending travel
restrictions on official personnel, gradually strengthening our culture
exchange program, etc. This progress led the Embassy a short time
ago to suggest ways to move ahead toward renegotiation and final
Confidential; Priority; Exdis.
from USNATO, January 19, reported on the January 18 POLADs meeting on preparations
for the CSCE Belgrade preparatory meeting. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
Policy File, [no film number])
to lodge an official protest with the Czechoslovak Ministry of Foreign Affairs concerning
the ongoing harassment of Washington Post reporter Michael Getler. Czechoslovak offi-
cials did not deny the surveillance, suggesting that increased criticism of Czechoslovak
policies in the Western press made increased vigilance necessary. (National Archives,

Czechoslovakia
settlement of claims/gold (ref B).4 We also were inclined to move as
quickly as possible to sign the scientific/cultural exchanges agreement
and its implementation programs. Moreover, we were prepared fairly
soon to notify the GOC of a reduction in prior notification time for
their merchant ships to enter US ports and to recommend favorable
and prompt USG consideration of bilateral agreements with Czechoslo-
vakia in the civil air and textile fields. Of special short-term significance,
we were ready to urge the Department to start active preparation for
the planned visit to Washington, perhaps in April, of Deputy Foreign
Minister Spacil at Assistant Secretary Hartman’s invitation.
3. At this point, however, I think it would be wrong to play “busi-
ness-as-usual” by moving ahead promptly in areas of our bilateral
relations mentioned above. It is clear that the GOC wants to play that
way. For example, on January 10 the Acting Director of the MFA Sixth
Department told me at a reception at the Ministry that the text of
the exchanges agreement had been sent the previous day by Foreign
Minister Chnoupek to other agencies of the Czechoslovak Government
for their consideration; MFA efforts to expedite approving the agree-
ment for signature seem to be coming substantially ahead of the “three
month” schedule originally indicated. In a possibly related move to
improve US–GOC ties, the Minister of Foreign Trade told Economics
Counselor on Jan. 20 he was eager to meet Secretary Kreps (ref C).5
4. Rather than play along with the GOC, I propose that for the
time being we move forward only in those areas that are of direct and
important interest to the US (such as the Civil Air Agreement) and
completion of all minor steps for improvement of relations between the United States
and Czechoslovakia, Washington must again tackle the claims/gold issue. The Embassy
stressed that fast action was needed to maintain the momentum in improving U.S.-
Czechoslovak relations, and delay in proposing a new settlement would lead to a worsen-
ing of relations between the two countries. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
Policy File, D770006–1331) The claims/gold issue was the major remaining obstacle to
normalization of relations between the United States and Czechoslovakia. The conflict
stemmed from claims against Czechoslovakia by U.S. citizens for nationalized property
in Czechoslovakia following World War II. The settlement of the claims issue was a
prerequisite for the return to Czechoslovakia of 18.4 tons of Nazi-looted gold, due to
the GOC on the basis of the Paris Reparation Agreement of 1946 by the Tripartite
Commission (United States, United Kingdom, and France). The United States held 8.7
tons, with the balance being held in London. The last agreement was initialed in 1974,
but was blocked by an amendment introduced by Senator Russell B. Long (D-Louisiana)
to the 1974 Trade Act. The amendment required congressional approval for any agree-
ment on the claims/gold issue.
Foreign Trade Minister Barcak was interested in meeting Secretary Kreps. The Embassy
recommended that, because of the anti-Western campaign in Czechoslovakia, as well
as the ongoing trials and arrests of dissidents, such a high-level meeting was inopportune.
(National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, [no film number])

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
forego further action on the others, until we see more clearly what
evolves out of the Charter 77 confrontation. We should let the GOC
know that as a matter of principle we cannot remain indifferent to
appeals of any citizenry asking for international support in a struggle
for elementary human rights. If the situation for the dissidents greatly
worsens here, I believe that we should seriously consider indefinitely
postponing the Spacil visit or even withdrawing the invitation.
5. In addition, the Embassy proposes:
A. Port security—that we delay indefinitely informing GOC of
reduction in notification time.
B. Civil aviation—that we continue to support PanAm’s wishes
as we reach agreement on conditions for extending the Bilateral Air
Transport Agreement which formally expired December 31, 1976. Cur-
rent unwritten “gentlemen’s agreement” for interim extension must
eventually be replaced by formal extension. We recommend that this
be done, in spite of Charter 77 issue, in order to protect PanAm’s
landing rights and its commercial investment here.
C. Textiles—that we be in no hurry to replace our bilateral agree-
ment with a consultative mechanism, even though we originally pro-
posed this change. However, given the technical nature of the change,
we should not delay action on this step unduly.
D. Scientific/cultural exchanges: We have about one month to
watch development of Charter 77 issue before decision is required on
whether to go ahead with negotiating the exchanges implementation
program and to sign agreement and program. Human rights issues
are highly relevant to this agreement, so we suggest Department con-
tinue to prepare for implementation negotiations as originally sched-
uled, i.e. possibly some time in March, but be prepared to postpone
them at last minute, if political considerations require.
E. Claims/gold: Here again we suggest Department proceed with
groundwork for renegotiation, as proposed in ref B, but not become
locked into any time framework. Congressional consultations should
stress that in reaching USG substantive negotiating position we are
not committing ourselves to timing. In considering when to propose
opening renegotiation, we will want to consider not only issue of
human rights of Czechoslovaks, but also the rights of the U.S. claimants
and the possibility that in current situation GOC may be more amenable
to accepting tougher settlement terms than previously.
6. At the same time, we must take into our calculations that the
GOC may retaliate for a “go-slow-approach on our part by slowing or
temporarily halting its processing of divided family cases.
7. The Department may also want to consider making the human
rights issue in Czechoslovakia an item for discussion in the NATO

Czechoslovakia
Council and seek to coordinate an allied attitude toward current
relations with this country—with special attention to how the NATO
democracies respond to the Charter 77 struggle as the Belgrade CSCE
review gathering draws nearer. We note (ref D) that discussion of
dissident activity in USSR and EE is already on agenda for Council’s
February 7 meeting.
Byrne
97.
Memorandum From the Counselor of the Department of
State (Nimetz) to Secretary of State Vance1
Washington, July 6, 1977
SUBJECT
Czechoslovakia Claims/Gold
Kempton Jenkins and I called on Senator Russell Long on June 28
to obtain his “blessing” to resume our negotiations with the Czechs
for the settlement of outstanding claims and the return of Nazi-looted
gold which we currently hold.2
He did not accept our recommendation that we attempt to obtain
from the Czechs a $32 million lump-sum settlement (50 cents on the
dollar using Long’s calculations; 60 cents using ours). This amount had
been floated last year in private negotiations by a US businessman,
Nimetz, Counselor of the Department of State, Under Secretary of State for Security
Box 1, MN Chron—Official—July–December 1977. Confidential. The Department also
reported on the meeting with Long in telegram 159627 to Prague and Rome, July 9.
2 Senator Long wrote in a March 22 letter to Vance that, because of Czechoslovak
intransigence on renegotiating the initial 20 million settlement of the claims, “my personal
view is now that a settlement of twice $20 million would still not be half enough.” Long
suggested that the United States unilaterally settle the claims by selling the Czechoslovak
gold on the open market. (National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Assistant Legal Adviser
Vance wrote Long on April 12, informing him that the administration’s review of policy
toward Eastern Europe would also cover the issue of the Czechoslovak gold and that
either he or Under Secretary for Economic Growth, Energy, and the Environment Richard
Cooper would contact the Senator to discuss the Czechoslovak issue. (Ibid.)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
apparently with Long’s blessing.3 Long forcefully expressed his view
that we should settle the problem by selling the Czech gold held in
the US ($40–50 million) and paying off the American claimants. He
reiterated his view that because the Czechs seized our property we
have every right to seize theirs. He was not convinced by any of our
standard arguments, to wit, that legal custody of the gold is shared
jointly by us, the UK, and France, that many of the claimants are elderly
and would be happy with partial settlements now while they are still
alive, and that the time is favorable for obtaining a reasonable settle-
ment with the Czechs.
I have asked L to examine the legal restraints on our disposing of
the gold unilaterally. I will explore with EUR the political effects of this
as well as other possible actions in light of Long’s extremely negative
reaction to our proposal.4
David Scott, chairman of Allis-Chalmers and of the U.S. section of the U.S.-Czechoslovak
Economic Council during his June 1976 trip to Prague. Scott, reportedly with approval
from Senator Long, informed the Czechoslovak Government that the 1974 agreement
would have to be renegotiated and that, in order to obtain congressional approval, at
least $32 million should be paid to U.S. claimants. While the GOC initially dismissed
the suggestion, the Embassy subsequently reported that GOC officials moved from
stating that changes to the 1974 agreement would be “inadmissible,” to Foreign Minister
Chnoupek’s statement that Prague was ready to start “renegotiations” on the gold/
4 The Bureau of European Affairs drafted a response from Vest to Nimetz that
recommended against seizing the gold. The memorandum was forwarded for signature
on July 15. (National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Assistant Legal Adviser for European
dum from the Legal Adviser was found.

Czechoslovakia
98.
Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance to
President Carter1
Washington, undated
SUBJECT
Czechoslovak Claims/Gold Issue
In response to your question, here is a history of the Czechoslovak
claims/gold issue.2
Except for East Germany, Czechoslovakia is the only East European
country with which the United States has not concluded a claims agree-
ment providing for compensation for the nationalized properties of
U.S. citizens.
Two previous agreements, negotiated and initialled ad referendum,
have not come into force. Under the more recent agreement in 1974,
Czechoslovakia would have paid $29 million (40¢ on the dollar on
outstanding principal) to U.S. nationals. This figure would include $8.5
million credited as paid in 1953 and compares favorably to agreements
reached between the U.S. and Poland, Romania, and Hungary and to
agreements reached between other Western governments and Czecho-
slovakia. The U.S. would have consented to the return to Czechoslova-
kia of 18.4 tons of Nazi-looted gold held pursuant to the Paris Repara-
tion Agreement of 1946 by the Tripartite Commission (U.S., U.K.,
France). (The U.S. holds 8.7 tons of this with the rest in London.)
Senator Long, as Chairman of the Finance Committee and floor
manager of the Trade Act of 1974, was responsible for the rejection of
this more recent agreement. The Trade Act’s Section 408 (introduced
by Senators Long and Gravel) requires that the claims agreement be
renegotiated and submitted to the Congress for approval before the
gold can be returned. Senator Long has vocally expressed dissatisfac-
tion with the State Department’s handling of this matter although a
a July 12 Evening Report from Vance to Carter. President Carter wrote the following
instructions for Vance at end of the memorandum: “Try to let me know what the Czechs
will now accept. Then let me talk to Long. J.”
2 In an Evening Report dated July 6, Vance informed Carter that the Department
had approached Senator Long on June 28 in order to obtain his “blessing” for resuming
negotiations with the Czechoslovak Government on the claims/gold agreement. Vance
informed Carter that Long was opposed to a settlement figure of $32 million and was
strongly in favor of vesting the gold. Vance concluded: “In view of Long’s opposition
and recent unfriendly Czech behavior, at this point we plan to do no more than look
into the legal avenues open to us.” Carter wrote on the memorandum: “Give me a brief
(2 page) memo on history.” (Ibid.)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
number of Senators and Congressmen supported the 1974 agreement
which we negotiated.
Our basic goal remains to obtain compensation for U.S. claimants,
many of whom are elderly and of limited financial means. Most of them
would have been satisfied with, or acquiesced in, the 1974 agreement.
In addition, we cannot expect any significant improvement in U.S.-
Czechoslovak relations until we conclude a claims agreement. The
Czechoslovak Government has made this clear by refusing to finalize
the Consular Convention negotiated in 1973 and by delaying the open-
ing of a U.S. Consulate in Bratislava.
In June 1976, David Scott, President of Allis-Chalmers and the
head of the U.S. Section of the U.S.-Czechoslovak Economic Council,
informed Czechoslovak officials that Long would approve a $32 million
lump sum payment (in addition to the $8.5 million already credited as
having been paid in 1953). Czechoslovak officials rejected this proposal.
However, they said adjustments to the agreement we had reached in
1974 were possible, and later indicated to us that the amount was
“negotiable”. Nevertheless, Scott reported to Long that the Czechoslo-
vaks were “intransigent”, and the Senator then wrote to me proposing
that the U.S. Government seize the gold to satisfy outstanding claims.
Meanwhile, Czechoslovak officials have again stated privately and
publicly their willingness to confer with us on this issue.
On June 28, senior State Department officials sought Long’s “bless-
ing” to resume negotiations with the Czechoslovaks in which we would
attempt to obtain from them the $32 million lump sum settlement (50
cents on the dollar using Long’s calculations; 56 [60?] cents using ours)
which Long had previously indicated would be acceptable.3 Long force-
fully expressed his view that the easiest method to settle the problem
would be to sell the Czechoslovak gold held in the U.S. (worth approxi-
mately $45 million) and pay off the American claimants. He was not
convinced by our arguments that we are restrained by law (Paris Repa-
ration Agreement) and that such an action would severely damage
U.S.-Czechoslovak relations.
We are examining both the legal restraints on our disposing of the
gold unilaterally and the political effects of this (vis-a-vis the French
and British as well as the Czechoslovaks). In addition, we are examining
our next steps in light of Long’s extremely negative reaction to our
proposal.
3 See Document 97.

Czechoslovakia
99.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
Czechoslovakia1
242479. Subject: The Secretary’s Conversation With Czechoslovak
Foreign Minister Chnoupek on October 6.
Participants
US Side:
The Secretary
Nicholas G. Andrews (notetaker)
Czechoslovak Side:
Bohuslav Chnoupek, Foreign Minister
Jaromir Johannes, Ambassador to the US
Eduard Kukan, Counselor in Washington
Mr. Suja, Chef de Cabinet to the Foreign Minister
Mr. Kovarik, interpreter
1. Summary: Chnoupek said US-Czechoslovak relations have not
moved substantially forward in five years and the main problem is the
claims/gold issue. The new views conveyed by Ambassador Byrne are
very different from the previous ones and Chnoupek wondered if the
Ambassador was speaking officially. The Secretary said we wish to
improve relations and cited claims/gold and Czechoslovak treatment of
US journalists and the Charter 77 group as matters which have brought
about the present situation. He assured Chnoupek that Ambassador
Byrne is authorized to try to resolve the claims issue and has the full
confidenceandsupportoftheUSG.HementionedthevisitoftheDeputy
MinisterofForeignTradeandtheCultural/ScientificAgreementasposi-
tive steps and Chnoupek agreed. Chnoupek said he would meet again
soon with Ambassador Byrne. He presented the Czechoslovak view on
human rights. The Secretary said the US is not approaching the Belgrade
Conference in a spirit of confrontation but in order to review seriously
theextentof progress achievedandtodiscuss new initiatives. Chnoupek
warned thatif the human rightsarea issingled out for debate, a construc-
tivedialogue would be impossible. He said the Czechoslovak delegation
is prepared for a constructive discussion. End summary
Confidential; Exdis; Priority. Drafted by Andrews; cleared by Luers; approved by Ander-
son. The meeting took place in New York at the annual meeting of the UN General
Assembly.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
2. The Secretary opened by expressing his pleasure at the opportu-
nity to talk of matters of mutual interest and to improve the relationship
between our two countries which is the objective we both share.
Chnoupek thanked the Secretary for receiving him and mentioned
that he has not had an opportunity for almost three years to have a
discussion on bilateral relations at this level. In the Czechoslovak view
and, he thought, in the US view, the development of relations is not
in keeping with the general trend. Among the Socialist countries, he
said, Czechoslovakia has to rank in the last place. In substance, we are
in the same place as we were five to six years ago. At that time, the
work done with American colleagues did not lead to the desired results.
He admitted there have been some positive steps during the most
recent period. He had a one and one-half hour talk with Ambassador
Byrne on bilateral relations and they went into considerable detail.
They evaluated all the positive steps but also said that the main problem
remains unresolved, namely the property and financial claims.2
Noting the discussions on claims in the 1960’s Chnoupek men-
tioned Secretary Rogers’ visit to Czechoslovakia during which it was
agreed to resume talks. After hard negotiations, Czechoslovakia
believed it had concluded a very reasonable agreement which was
roughly in keeping with those the US reached with other Socialist
countries. The agreement was initialled but not concluded. Chnoupek
said there has hardly been any practical possibility for a political dia-
logue since then. The last visit to Prague was by an Assistant Secretary
(Hartman). Trade was not at all up to the possibilities. Czechoslovak
exports according to one joke, is as high as Polish exports of ham.
Imports are low. Tariffs for Czechoslovak goods are four times higher.
There is no opportunity to obtain credits.
3. Returning to the claims question, Chnoupek said he has seen a
large number of official, semi-official and unofficial people who have
expressed views on this question. In the last three years, he has almost
lost sight of what are official views and what are unofficial views,
citing conversations with Congressman Vanik and Senator Jackson. He
said that in their recent talk Ambassador Byrne had stated certain new
views. He expected that these would represent the official stand of the
US Government. But if he understood the Ambassador correctly, he
was giving his own reasoning about what a settlement would look like
tion between Ambassador Bryne and the Czechoslovak Foreign Minister. The discussion
covered bilateral relations, including treatment of the United States in the Czechoslovak
press. Chnoupek told Byrne that, while he understood U.S. dissatisfaction with the
treatment, he “could not see any hope for amelioration in the near future, as press was
province of ideologues, not government.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign

Czechoslovakia
based on his discussions in Washington. Therefore, Chnoupek said he
was not clear whether the Ambassador was talking officially or taking
soundings. Chnoupek said he also told Ambassador Byrne that the
new suggestions differ a great deal from what was agreed in the past.
The new ideas represent 50–60 of the principal whereas the previous
agreement was about 41. The latter was approximately the percentage
agreed upon in settlements with Bulgaria, Hungary and Poland. The
only higher percentage seems to be the one with Yugoslavia at 44.
Czechoslovakia would be an exception and it would not look well for
the government. It would mean a renegotiation, and Chnoupek said
he would have to go again to the government and the Parliament to
seek approval. He is very afraid that renegotiation would be very
difficult, if possible at all. According to his instructions from the govern-
ment, he has freedom of action in regard to time limits and frequency
of payments but not in the total sum. He concluded by saying he would
be glad to hear the US official stand and Czechoslovakia is interested
in normalizing and developing relations.
4. The Secretary said he will answer the specific question but also
say something on the broader perspective. We do wish to improve the
relations between our two countries. The Secretary said Chnoupek
could convey that as the conviction of President Carter and the entire
administration. He said there are principally two matters that have
brought about the present condition in bilateral relations. One is the
claims question and the return of the gold. The other arises out of and
is connected with Czechoslovak treatment of US journalists and the
Charter 77 movement. The Secretary said he would be less than frank
if he did not make this clear.
5. The Secretary said Ambassador Byrne is authorized to begin
discussions with Chnoupek to try to resolve the claims matter so that
relations can progress. He noted that the 1974 Agreement had been
rejected by Congress and that Congress must approve a new agreement
under our laws, or otherwise it will have no force and effect. Congress
has said that the total sum must be substantially raised or there will
not be an agreement. The Secretary realized that this made things very
difficult for Chnoupek but without this substantial increase it would
be impossible to get congressional approval. He said Ambassador
Byrne has been given authority to discuss these matters with Chnoupek
and that he has our full confidence and support in working out a
settlement, if that is possible. He is speaking on behalf of and with the
full backing of the government. The Secretary said he hoped discussions
can go forward because without progress our relations will be affected.
Secondly, the Secretary said we are familiar with the problems this has
raised. We hope the future will bring some changes in these matters
and will remove some of the obstacles. He noted the forthcoming

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
visit of the Deputy Minister of Foreign Trade and the new agreement
reached in the scientific and cultural exchanges field. He saw those as
positive factors and hoped we can move in that direction. He said we
want to move forward but must deal with the two problems.
6. Chnoupek said he will meet again soon with Ambassador Byrne.
The claims issue was the main problem in bilateral relations. He said
he is grateful the Secretary mentioned the visit of the Deputy Minister
of Foreign Trade on the occasion of the meeting of the Economic Council
and hopes he will have access to appropriate officials.3 The Secretary
said he will. Chnoupek said the Czechoslovak side has tried to come
forward to meet the US side on the scientific and cultural agreement.
As for the journalists and Charter 77 Chnoupek said he has discussed
those matters with everyone he has met. The discussion of internal
affairs was a matter of reciprocity. When the US presents a list of articles
about the US taken from the Czechoslovak press, Czechoslovakia has
a list of articles about it taken from the US press. Sometimes, as in the
case of Charter 77, it becomes a concentrated issue. Chnoupek said it
is a question of which came first, the chicken or the egg. He referred
to dreadful articles in the US press calling Ambassador Johannes a
KGB spy. The Secretary said he had missed them. Chnoupek wondered
what the US wants when the “official press”, not to speak of Radio Free
Europe, speaks of a normalized Czechoslovakia. He said the ideological
struggle will be continued and the US will not praise Czechoslovakia
as a Communist country. The US follows a different road and Czecho-
slovakia believes in different goals. In the bilateral dialogue, ethical
norms should be observed. Chnoupek apologized for bringing all this
up in the first meeting but said it was necessary to clarify matters and
this had been the first chance in three years for such a discussion. He
said he would report the Secretary’s views immediately to the President
and to the government.
7. The Secretary thought that in human rights matters the Belgrade
Conference can be, and he thought will be, a constructive dialogue.
The US is not approaching it in a spirit of confrontation, or with a
view to engaging in polemical rhetoric against any other country; but
we are approaching it in a spirit of serious review of where progress
has been made, when progress has not been made and to develop
guidelines to help us make progress in the future. The Belgrade Confer-
ence is a forum in which there can be discussion of new initiatives.
The Secretary hoped a better understanding and a strengthening of
3 Jakubec visited the United States in October 1977 to attend the U.S.-Czechoslovak
Economic Council meeting. The Department reported his October 28 meeting with Vest
Policy File, D770399–0115)

Czechoslovakia
relations will come out of the conference. The initial reports from the
US delegation is that that is the spirit on both sides.
8. Chnoupek said the Secretary’s position was also the Czechoslo-
vak position in substance. Czechoslovakia sees the Final Act as a com-
prehensive whole and does not want to extract individual sections,
such as human rights, for debate. If that happens, there will be a big
battle. He spoke of his years in propaganda work and the different
views on both sides on this matter which would make it impossible
to speak of a constructive dialogue. He referred to his sharp discussion
on human rights with Netherlands Foreign Minister Van der Stoel
earlier this year. Chnoupek concluded that the Czechoslovak delegation
at Belgrade is prepared for a constructive discussion. Chnoupek said
they had made a good beginning and the Secretary said he hoped to
see Chnoupek again.
Christopher
100.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
Czechoslovakia1
250945. Belgrade for USCSCE Del, Munich for Gilmore. Subject:
Major Charter 77 Figures Reportedly Convicted and Sentenced. Ref:
Munich 2963.2
1. According to Reuters reports received here, trial of major Charter
77 activists (Vaclav Havel, Frantisek Pavlicek, Jiri Lederer, and Ota
Ornest) on charges of anti-state activity, subversion, and contact with
such exiles as Pavel Tigrid and Jiri Pelikan began on October 17. De-
fendants were originally apprehended for, inter alia, assisting in the
distribution in the West of Czechoslovak literature banned by the
regime. Reuters states that sources close to the defendants report that
Confidential; Immediate. Drafted by Glenn; cleared in substance in EUR and cleared by
Kornblum, Brody, Schmidt, Nimetz, and Shulman; approved by Luers. Sent for informa-
tion Priority to Munich. Sent for information to Belgrade for the USCSCE delegation.
had informed the Consulate that four Charter 77 activists (Havel, Pavlicek, Lederer, and
Ornest) were to be tried for anti-state activities in Prague starting October 17, and
requested that reporting on the subject also be sent to Munich for information. (National

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
the four defendants were convicted and sentenced on October 18.
Reportedly two of the four received prison terms and two sus-
pended sentences.
2. During an Eastern European Embassy reception on evening of
October 17, EUR/EE Deputy Director raised subject of the trial with
Czechoslovak Ambassador Johannes, who, claiming that he had only
seen US press reports, said trial was not connected with Charter 77.
Department officer said he thought this would be hard for the
American public to believe in light of fact that most of the defendants
were prominent figures in the Charter 77 effort. He indicated we were
concerned by implications of the press reports we had seen and noted
his view that such events could not help but have a negative effect
on the atmosphere of our bilateral relations. Johannes reacted rather
sharply, saying that the trial was an internal Czechoslovak action and
that the US should not interfere in such matters. In response, Depart-
ment officer said we had no intention of interfering in Czechoslovakia’s
internal affairs; he had simply wished to point out how such actions
would undoubtedly be perceived in this country.
3. Septel contains text of contingency press guidance prepared for
Department’s noon press briefing on October 18, and the exchange
between the spokesman and reporters which took place. Action addres-
sees may draw on this guidance as required.3
4. Action requested: The Ambassador should, as soon as conven-
ient, convey to the Czech Government the following:
—The trial and the convictions of four Czech citizens reported in
the press appears inconsistent with the provisions of the CSCE Final
Act regarding the freer and wider dissemination of information of
all kinds.
—Moreover, three of the individuals tried had been directly associ-
ated with efforts to support full compliance with the Helsinki Final Act.
—This trial taking place during the opening phase of the Belgrade
Conference raises questions about the seriousness and intent of the
Czech Government regarding the objectives of this conference and the
Final Act itself.
—We raise this issue in the spirit of the Helsinki Final Act fully
realizing that judicial proceedings are essentially an internal matter.
3 The Department forwarded press guidance in telegram 250946 to Prague, October
19, following the speedy trial and conviction of the four Charter 77 leaders. (National
was forwarded to Prague and Belgrade in telegram 251229, October 19. (National

Czechoslovakia
—Yet since the reported activities of these individuals so directly
relate to the objectives of the CSCE Conference we believe it essential
that the authorities in Czechoslovakia understand that we expect
adverse reactions from the American people and that these events are
likely to have a negative impact on the atmosphere in our bilateral
relations.4
Vance
Byrne delivered the démarche on the trial and conviction of the Charter 77 activists in
Prague on October 18 to the Foreign Minister. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
National Committee fundraiser, President Carter told the audience that the recent convic-
tion of Czechoslovak dissidents created “serious problems” in the relationship between
the two countries. (Public Papers: Carter, 1977, Book II, p. 1896) During a White House
press conference on October 27, President Carter responded to a question about South
Africa’s human rights violations by once again referring to Czechoslovakia’s conviction
of dissidents. Carter suggested that trade policy and cultural exchanges could be curtailed
when another country violated policies that were important to the United States. (Public
Papers: Carter, 1977, Book II, p. 1916)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
101.
Briefing Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State
for European Affairs (Vest) to the Director of the Policy
Planning Staff (Lake)1
Washington, January 26, 1978
Your Meeting with Czechoslovak Ambassador Jaromir Johanes,
PARTICIPANTS
The Director, S/P
Phillip S. Kaplan, S/P
James H. Glenn, EUR/EE
Jaroslav Johanes, Czechoslovak Ambassador to the United States
SETTING
Ambassador Johanes recently indicated to Jim Glenn, EUR/EE, at
a reception that he would soon begin a series of courtesy calls on
various high-level officials of the Department of State and of other
executive agencies. His call on you is the first of this series. Since
requesting an appointment with you, he has requested similar appoint-
ments with Secretaries Blumenthal and Kreps.2 He has not indicated
an interest in discussing any specific subject during these calls. We do
not expect that he has anything new or extraordinary to discuss with
you. Rather, we speculate that he simply wants to extend his personal
contacts with U.S. officials, or that he is testing us to determine if we
are willing to extend to him the same degree of access to U.S. officials
which we have been pressuring his Government to extend to our
Ambassador to Czechoslovakia, Thomas R. Byrne.
ISSUES
1. Human Rights and the Implementation of the Helsinki Final Act
Essential Factors: The Czechoslovak Government last October con-
victed and sentenced four dissidents, including three signatories of
spondence, 1978. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Glenn; cleared by Schmidt. Luers
initialed the memorandum for Vest. No record of the meeting has been found. The
Ambassador’s first name was corrected by hand in the subject line. In a handwritten
note, presumably to Leo Reddy, the Secretariat Staff Director, S/P staff assistant Mary
Ann Casey remarked: “LR—PK [Phillip Kaplan] will ask desk do memo. TL says ok if
desk sits in w/PK. PK will ask desk & let you know. TL wants reschedule appt for next
week or week after so won’t conflict w/for. pol. report. Pls let PK know new date. I
will meet on whatever new date is. MAC.” (Ibid.)
that Ambassador Johanes, having failed to secure a meeting with Secretary Blumenthal
or Secretary Kreps, decided to cancel his appointments at Treasury and Commerce.

Czechoslovakia
Charter 77. Two received prison terms of three or more years for
subversion involving alleged efforts to send written materials out of
the country and to have materials published abroad. Although Czecho-
slovak authorities maintain there was no connection between that trial
and Charter 77, the three Charter signatories were directly associated
with efforts of the Charter 77 Movement to encourage full compliance
by Czechoslovakia with all provisions of the CSCE Final Act. Earlier
this month, the Czechoslovak court rejected the appeal of the three
Charter signatories and lessened by one year the sentence of the other
defendant, who had pleaded guilty at the trial and subsequently pub-
licly apologized for his “crimes.”
We have received information that a Charter 78 may be dissemi-
nated in the near future. This new Charter reportedly will examine the
compliance of the Czechoslovak Government with the CSCE Final Act,
the International Covenants on Civil and Political and on Economic,
Social, and Cultural Rights, and the Czechoslovak Constitution.
We regard human rights as a key issue in our bilateral relations
and, both here and in Prague, have made our position on this subject
clear. (See, for example, the attached report of my conversation last
fall with a Czechoslovak Deputy Foreign Trade Minister.)3 Pending
indications as to how the regime’s treatment of dissidents may evolve,
we are going slow on any initiatives to improve relations. For example,
we are delaying signing a cultural and scientific exchanges agreement,
negotiated in 1976. The regime’s treatment of dissidents—and its over-
all image here—will determine whether we will be able to take positive
action both on the exchanges agreement and on other bilateral issues.
We also object to the Czechoslovak Government’s policy on the
issuance of visas to U.S. journalists. It flatly refuses to issue visas to a few
journalists and demands that others pledge not to attempt to contact
dissidents while in Czechoslovakia before it will issue them visas. We
consider this policy to be inconsistent, to say the least, with the provi-
sions of the CSCE Final Act regarding the treatment of, and working
conditions for, journalists. We take every useful opportunity to express
our concern and displeasure to the Czechoslovak Government on
this issue.
Department reported the discussion between Jakubec and Vest on October 18, 1977. The
two officials discussed the status of bilateral relations between the two countries and
the effect of human rights, especially the recent trials and convictions of dissidents in
Czechoslovakia, on the future of relations between the two countries. (National Archives,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
2. Claims/Gold
Essential Factors: We negotiated an ad referendum agreement on this
long-standing issue in July, 1974, involving satisfaction of the claims
of U.S. citizens against the Government of Czechoslovakia in return
for the return to Czechoslovakia of its share of the gold confiscated by
the Nazis before and during World War II. Senator Long’s desire for
a higher settlement than we had obtained led to Section 408 of the Trade
Act of 1974 requiring renegotiation of the agreement. The Czechoslovak
Government is opposed to giving us as much as Senator Long would
like. Ambassador Byrne in mid-September, 1977, began quiet, informal
discussions
on
this
issue
with
Czechoslovak
Foreign
Minister
Chnoupek. The Secretary in his UNGA meeting with Chnoupek in late
September emphasized that Ambassador Byrne has the Department’s
full confidence and support in working out a settlement but stressed
that a successful resolution of the claims/gold issue would not of itself
normalize our bilateral relations. He indicated that improvement in
relations would also require a change in the human rights situation in
Czechoslovakia and in the manner in which the Czechoslovak Govern-
ment implements the CSCE Final Act.4
Ambassador Byrne hopes in the near future again to discuss this
issue with Chnoupek and then to send us his thoughts on what amount
might be acceptable to all concerned. As in the case of the exchanges
agreement, the regime’s treatment of dissidents may delay whatever
progress is possible in resolving this issue.
4 See Document 99.

Czechoslovakia
102.
Memorandum for the Files1
Washington, undated
SUBJECT
Ambassador Byrne’s Meeting with Senator Long, March 2
United States Ambassador to Czechoslovakia, Thomas R. Byrne,
in the Department on consultation, met with Senator Russell Long (D.,
La.) on March 2 to discuss the linked issues of the return of the gold
in the custody of the Tripartite Commission for the Restitution of
Monetary Gold (looted by the Nazis during World War II) and the
resolution of claims of U.S. citizens against the Czechoslovak Govern-
ment for the nationalization of their properties after World War II.2
The United States and Czechoslovakia negotiated an ad referendum
agreement in 1974 providing for payment of compensation to U.S.
claimants in return for release by the U.S. of the Czechoslovak gold.
Senators Long and Gravel, allegedly at the behest of some U.S. claim-
ants dissatisfied with the amount of compensation provided for in the
agreement, in effect repudiated it by amending the Trade Act of 1974 to
provide for Congressional approval of any claims settlement agreement
with Czechoslovakia before the U.S. could release its holdings of
Czechoslovak gold. Since 1974, Senator Long’s position on appropriate
compensation of U.S. claimants has changed several times.3 Last sum-
mer, Long supported Ambassador Byrne’s idea to discuss the claims/
gold issue with the Czechoslovaks to learn whether it would be possible
and appropriate to present them with a new proposal. Ambassador
Byrne held discussions with Czechoslovak officials and returned in
late February on consultation to attempt to obtain a commitment on a
“ball-park” figure from Senator Long.
tial. Drafted by Glenn on March 22; cleared by Schmidt.
ment that, during his trip to Washington for consultations, he would like to focus on
the “major bilateral issue with the Czechoslovaks and the sine qua non for any eventual
normalization of our relations, claims/gold.” Byrne reported that he was ready to discuss
concrete steps forward both at the Department and during his consultations on the Hill.
briefing memorandum for Luers on the history of the Czechoslovak gold/claims issue
and the involvement of Senator Long. The memorandum suggested that it was essential
for Ambassador Byrne to “obtain at least a ‘ballpark-figure’ commitment from Long”
before negotiations with Czechoslovakia were to start again. (National Archives, RG 59,
Office of the Assistant Legal Adviser for European Affairs, Country Files, 1950–1986,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
At their meeting, Senator Long told Ambassador Byrne that he
wants a 100% settlement, which the Czechoslovak Government would
almost certainly reject out of hand. In lieu of a 100% settlement, Long
wants the U.S. Government unilaterally to vest the Czechoslovak gold
in its possession and to use the proceeds to satisfy U.S. claimants. Long
said this should cause the Czechoslovaks no real problem since, once
this issue was out of the way, the road would then be clear for them
to receive MFN and USG credits. According to Long, the value of MFN
and credits for Czechoslovakia would far exceed the value of the lost
gold. Such action would violate international law and our treaty obliga-
tions and would create serious difficulties with Great Britain and
France, our fellow Tripartite Commission members, which have
already agreed to the return of the gold to Czechoslovakia. Advised
of the likelihood of such difficulties, Long recommended linking British
and French acquiescence in vesting the gold to the status of the Con-
corde, implying that an amendment to a tax bill could effectively ban
the Concorde. Long also reiterated that he would like to talk with the
Secretary about this claims/gold issue.
103.
Memorandum From Robert King of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, March 27, 1978
SUBJECT
State Department Suggestion to Make a New Proposal to the Czechoslovak
Government on the Claims/Gold Problem and Implement an Exchanges
Agreement
At Matt Nimitz’s suggestion, a memo is being circulated in State
that, if cleared, would be sent to Secretary Vance by George Vest
recommending that the US present a new proposal to the Czechoslovak
government to resolve the Claims/Gold issue and that a program
document be negotiated which would permit the signing of the
exchanges agreement with Czechoslovakia that was negotiated in 1976.
the top of the memorandum “ZB—The idea is [to] reward them[?] for their [?] position
[at] Belgrade.”

Czechoslovakia
Since the memo is being circulated in draft form at present, now is the
time to make our views known before Secretary Vance is asked to
approve these steps.2
With regard to the Claims/Gold issue, an agreement was initialled
in 1974 calling for 41% payment on the claims, after which the US
would return gold seized from Czechoslovakia by Nazi Germany and
subsequently taken by the US, Britain, and France in 1945. Senator Long
rejected the 1974 settlement as being too low. In talks with Ambassador
Byrne (our man in Prague who was here in early March for consulta-
tions), Long said the Czechoslovaks should pay 100% plus interest and
if they refuse, the US should vest the gold and pay the claims.3 This,
however, would cause problems with the British and French who are
members of the Triparte Commission for Restitution of Monetary Gold,
and it would also create difficulties under international law. The Trade
Act of 1974 requires any agreement on the Claims/Gold Issue to receive
Congressional approval. Since Long’s refusal to accept the 1974 agree-
ment, no movement has taken place on the question. State would like
to initiate discussions with the Czechoslovak government in an attempt
to secure an agreement on a higher settlement figure, which would
then be presented to Congress for approval.
There are several thousand US claimants. The longer the issue
remains unresolved, the lower the value of their claims. Both claimants
and Congress have been critical of inaction on the issue since 1974.
Although the Claims/Gold Question is an obstacle to better US-Czecho-
slovak relations, resolving it will not automatically lead to an improve-
ment in relations. In this case, there are valid domestic reasons for
attempting to solve it.
The decision to negotiate an exchanges agreement with Czechoslova-
kia was made by Kissinger in 1975 following the Helsinki conference.
(Agreements with Hungary and Bulgaria were negotiated and entered
into force in 1976.) Negotiations with Czechoslovakia were completed
in December 1976, but the accompanying implementing program docu-
ment was not completed because of criticism of the Czechoslovak
government’s actions against the Charter 77 group. State now proposes
that the implementing program be negotiated so that the exchanges
agreement can come into force. The justification is that such an agree-
ment will enhance our ability to establish contacts with Czechoslovak
citizens, which are currently very limited. It would require probably
two months to complete negotiations, and State would like to sign the
agreement by June in order to use funds in the fiscal 1978 budget set
2 Not found.
3 See Document 102.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
aside for the program. State would handle negotiations and the signing
in a low-key fashion in Prague in order to prevent its being seen as
an endorsement of the Husak regime.
On balance there seem to be valid reasons to initiate new negotia-
tions on the gold/claims question since American claimants are suffer-
ing from our inaction. Even if an agreement is reached it will require
some time to achieve. Furthermore, it will not reflect endorsement of
the Husak regime. The exchanges agreement, however, would reflect
favorably on the Husak government and its supposed advantages to
the US are, at best, marginal.
Recommendation:
That we make new proposals to the Czechoslovaks on the Claims/
Gold Question, but that we not sign the exchanges agreement at the
present time.4
4 Brzezinski checked the “Disagree” box without further comment.
104.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
Czechoslovakia1
146533. Subject: Czechoslovak Ambassador Johanes’ Meeting With
the Counselor.
1. Czechoslovak Ambassador Johanes, at his request, met with the
Counselor on June 7 to discuss bilateral relations before leaving for two
weeks of consultations and leave in Prague. Ira Wolf, C, and the Czecho-
slovak Desk Officer sat in. Following is a summary of the discussion.
2. General state of relations. In response to Johanes’ statement that
he wanted to understand the obstacles to improved relations, Nimetz
said that the US wants to have good relations with all states. No two are
alike, the USG approaches them on an equal basis. US/EE relations are
improving.Thereareproblems,buttheUSGtriestoresolvethem,includ-
ing those with Czechoslovakia. Effort and good will on both sides are
Confidential. Drafted by Glenn; cleared by Wolf; approved by Nimetz.

Czechoslovakia
required.OtherstatesareresponsivetoUSgestures,buttheUSperceives
little interest in Prague in improving relations. Czechoslovak media
attackson thePresidentand thecountry,the GOC’shuman rightspolicy,
its treatment of Western journalists, its handling of the normalization
program, and its policy on visas for former Czechoslovak citizens such
as Vosicky lead to bad feeling and make progress impossible. Nimetz
said he was pessimistic that much could be done to improve relations in
thenextfewmonths. Perhapsinthefallorearly nextyear,relationscould
beimproved.HeemphasizedthattheUSwouldliketoimproverelations
and wants both a claims settlement agreement and a cultural exchanges
agreement. The public’s attitude toward Czechoslovakia is favorable, as
it has been since 1918. The GOC’s attitude is the problem.
3. In response, Johanes said the GOC’s perception is completely
different, that it wants to improve relations but the US is unwilling to.
His discussion with George Vest on June 5 (septel)2 convinced him
that the US does not want improved relations. Johanes denied that
the problems Nimetz mentioned were really obstacles to improved
relations. The GOC is prosecuting dissidents only when they violate
Czechoslovak law. On the other hand, in some countries allied to the
US, people are shot on the street. The GOC’s policy on visas for former
Czechoslovak citizens has greatly improved; almost everyone can now
visit Czechoslovakia. The GOC’s media treatment of the US simply
reflects the US media’s treatment of Czechoslovakia. Johanes men-
tioned that, 1½ years ago, he complained about an article in the New
York Times attacking Husak (Gaulaiter Husak). In his two years here,
he has seen nothing positive about Czechoslovakia in the US press. Re
Helsinki, Johanes said that the GOC knows that problems exist in the
US, but they do not influence the GOC’s desire to improve relations.
A foreign policy requiring another state to take specific actions before
relations can be improved is childish; the GOC rejects such require-
ments. Other Western countries which value human rights have found
it possible to improve relations with Czechoslovakia. Why not the US?
The GOC does want a cultural exchanges agreement with the US, in
accord with the Helsinki Final Act. The GOC was told that the agree-
ment could not be signed before August, 1978 due to public opinion,
but Johanes wondered if the elections in November are also a factor.
2 On June 5, Ambassador Johanes met with Assistant Secretary for European Affairs
George Vest. Vest informed Johanes that the bilateral relations between the two govern-
ments were “characterized by differing perspectives on such issues as divided families
and dissidents” and that, because of their present state, no improvement was likely to
occur. On the claims/gold issue, Vest informed the Czechoslovak Ambassador that
“even if we had an agreed proposal ready to present, we would not now do so due to
Central Foreign Policy File, D780237–0846)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
not the only difficulty. The problem is the general atmosphere in
Czechoslovakia and its hostility to the US and to US journalists.
Nimetz said he personally would like nothing better than to be able
to begin spending time in improving relations with Czechoslovakia.
He reiterated that there is no impediment on the US side to
improved relations, citing his own participation in arrangements to
return the Crown of St. Stephen to Hungary and in negotiations to
extend it MFN tariff status. The key was that the USG thought that
Hungary had worked out problems in a constructive way. Even Bul-
garia and East Germany have found it possible to improve relations
with the US. Czechoslovakia could, too. Relations cannot become
much worse.
5. Pavel Vosicky case. Nimetz raised Vosicky’s case as an example
of GOC actions which harm relations. Nimetz explained that Vosicky
wants to visit his dying mother but has been unable recently to obtain a
visa. The GOC, on humanitarian if no other grounds, could have given
Vosicky a visa. Its refusal has produced a markedly negative reaction in
the USG which contributes to a further deterioration of relations.
6. Claims/Gold. Johanes said the GOC is eager for a settlement;
American claimants need the remainder of their compensation. He said
the GOC thought the 1974 Agreement was a good one; even the State
Department said so until recently. The 1974 Agreement provided for
roughly the same percentage settlement as those the USG has negoti-
ated with other EE states. Johanes stressed that the Czechoslovak people
do not accept the USG’s refusal to release the gold and it is difficult
to explain why the USG refuses when France and Britain have agreed
to do so. Johanes noted that the UK and Czechoslovakia do not yet
have a claims settlement agreement yet there is no dispute over the
gold. Although it disliked the idea, the GOC agreed in 1974 to the
USG’s desire to link the issues. Johanes emphasized that the GOC
regards this issue as most important. Until it is resolved, it will be
impossible to improve relations.
7. Nimetz responded that the State Department’s attitude to the 1974
Agreement is academic; the Congress requires renegotiation and any
agreement must be acceptable to the Congress. This will take some time.
The USG is working on its position. Clearly, the 1974 Agreement is no
longer adequate. The price of gold has increased, and the dollar has
depreciated.Theclaims settlementagreementswithother EEstateswere
negotiated years ago. The settlements were worth much more then. The
GOC loses nothing on the gold. The American claimants lost their prop-
erties and deserve compensation. Nimetz asked if the GOC wants to dis-
cuss the issue. Johanes said yes, that Ambassador Byrne had said he
would return to Czechoslovakia last year with a new proposal but had

Czechoslovakia
made only a vague statement about the need for additional compensa-
tion. Nimetz reiterated that the USG does not yet have a position.
8. Access. Johanes complained that the Secretary had been unable
to see him this week despite his promise to Foreign Minister Chnoupek
in New York last week that he would do so. Johanes also complained
that both Blumenthal and Kreps have refused to see him. He contrasted
their refusal to the willingness of senior GOC officials to meet with
Ambassador Byrne at his pleasure. Johanes said there seemed to be
more opportunities in Prague than in Washington for discussions with
USG officials and wondered whether anti-GOC attitudes were not
being created here. Nimetz informed Johanes that the Secretary is
extremely busy and cannot meet with most Ambassadors. Nimetz
added that, even when arrangements to return the Crown to Hungary
were underway, the Secretary had been able to meet only once with
the Hungarian Ambassador. Nimetz said Johanes should not take the
Secretary’s inability to meet with him as a slight.
Vance
105.
Telegram From the Embassy in Czechoslovakia to the
Department of State and Multiple Diplomatic Posts1
2142. Subject: 10th Anniversary of Czechoslovak Invasion—Cur-
rent Developments. Ref: Prague 1911.2
1. Summary: With the anniversary of 1968 Soviet intervention less
than ten days away, the most prominent visible sign that Czechoslovaks
are aware of it is in frequent references to 1968 events in regime propa-
Confidential. Sent Priority to the Department. Sent to Belgrade, East Berlin, Bonn, Bucha-
rest, Budapest, London, Moscow, Paris, Rome, Sofia, Vienna, Warsaw, USNATO, West
Berlin, USUN, and Beijing.
situation in Czechoslovakia on the evening of the tenth anniversary of the 1968 Soviet
invasion. The Embassy concluded that no “great change in Czechoslovak domestic or
foreign policy or in bilateral relations” can be expected “during the rest of this year.”
ment was provided by the Central Intelligence Agency on August 17, in an Intelligence
Memorandum entitled “Czechoslovakia Ten Years After.” (Central Intelligence Agency,
Folder 74, Czechoslovakia: Ten Years After)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
ganda. Dissident activity appearsto be confined to preparing statements
for release and reviving underground cultural activities. End summary.
2. Activities of Charter 77 supporters. It still appears as if the main
objective of human rights activists in marking the 10th anniversary
will be issuance of declarations reaffirming fidelity to calls for greater
freedom that distinguished the 1968 Dubcek regime. The declaration
stemming from recent meeting of Charter 77 and Polish human rights
activists near the CSSR-Polish border is a case in point (Prague 2096).3
But perhaps most interesting event this week has been commencement
of so-called “living room theatre” production of the Shakespeare classic
Macbeth, organized by playwright Pavel Kohout and starring Pavel
Landovsky and Vlasta Chramostova—all of whom are denied the possi-
bility of openly pursuing their professions as a result of identification
the play took place in apartments of Charter supporters. Embassy
P&C Admin. Secretary and wife of PAO attended first session; DCM
and wife attended the second. In both cases, they were only non-
Czechoslovaks invited. Kohout told DCM those involved in the play
were trying to continue their professions in this way despite efforts of
the regime to deny them work opportunities. Kohout added that there
would be no more performances like these until after 10th anniversary.
In September, he expects such living room performances to occur on
a more or less regular basis. Meanwhile, as Embassy had expected
(reftel) he and other Charter 77 proponents plan to depart Prague this
week to remain in country homes until the end of the month.
3. Regime preparations. The Husak regime appears to be approach-
ing the 10th anniversary with increased confidence of being able to
cope with any contingency that may arise. Accent is on business as
usual, with major attention at the moment to formal opening of new
Prague metro lines on August 12. On the other hand, we hear security
forces have been put on alert until the end of the month. Efforts are
going forward to ensure that Charter 77 personalities will be generally
dispersed on August 20–21. And MFA is tightening visa controls, partic-
ularly with regard to non-accredited foreign journalists, who will prob-
ably be few and far between here for remainder of August. Austrian
DCM Karas say 3 Austrian correspondents have already been refused
entry to cover the anniversary. NY Times correspondent Andelman,
Charter 77 and the Polish Committee of Workers’ Defense (KOR) drafted a statement
on the ten-year anniversary of the Soviet invasion. The Embassy concluded that, while
the document was primarily interesting as evidence of direct contacts between Charter
77 and KOR, it would “presumably cause security officials in both countries some
additional heartburn.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,

Czechoslovakia
who is accredited here, has just arrived from Belgrade but has been
instructed to return there until New York strike situation is clarified.
Time magazine stringer Stichova tells us EE correspondent Aikman,
also accredited here, is expected to be in Prague next week and may
prepare a cover story on the anniversary.
4. Media coverage meanwhile focuses on campaign to denigrate
all aspects of 1968 policies, except the January Central Committee
Plenum (at which Dubcek replaced Novotny) and repeat shrill accusa-
tions against the main actors in Prague Spring. Rude Prova tends to
concentrate currently on alleged damage to the economy which resulted
in 1968–69 from the Sik reforms and to praise subsequent policy fol-
lowed under the Husak regime, which has brought Czechoslovakia to
its present supposedly enviable state of prosperity and stability. Weekly
Party press has moved increasingly from attacks on pro-reform individ-
uals and organizations to accusations that 1968 reforms were stimulated
and supported by the West in hopes of breaking Czechoslovakia away
from its allies; Herman Kahn, Henry Kissinger and Zbigniew Brezinski
are cited as chief proponents of this strategy. These latter pieces are
extended versions of noteworthy Yuri Zhukov commentary that
appeared in Moscow Pravda and was reprinted here August 8, showing
Soviet approval and probably close coordination of this line. Comment:
While the regime takes its precautions, the Czech masses seem to
be paying scant attention to the approaching anniversary. Prague’s
Wencelas Square, most likely site for any protest manifestation, is
thronged with tourists and shoppers, but so far reveals no sign of any
special security precautions. In spite of rumors of recent explosions at
Party buildings in Bratislava, neither we nor our NATO colleagues
have been able to find any significant evidence to suggest that August
probably correct in his expectation that the regime will formally greet
the anniversary, but have no clue yet as to the precise form this will take.
Byrne
passed without any significant event, describing the event as a “hard-liner affair.” Official
propaganda, the Embassy reported, used the occasion “to politic against any sort of eco-
telegram 2282 from Prague, August 25, the Embassy reported that it received information
that “four students marked the anniversary of the invasion by placing a bouquet of flowers
on the monument in Wenceslas Square and observing a moment of silence. The bouquet
was promptly removed by police and the students’ identification cards were checked. This
is the only such event on August 21 of which Morevec was aware.” (National Archives,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
106.
Telegram From the Embassy in Czechoslovakia to the
Department of State and Multiple Diplomatic Posts1
2811. Subject: Husak Regime Tightens Internal Control. Ref: (A)
Summary: Czechoslovak and Polish police have, for the first time,
prevented a meeting of Charter 77 and KOR human rights activists.
Moreover, Czech police have not only beaten and incarcerated Charter
spokesman Sabata but have also begun generally to tighten surveillance
over nonsanctioned cultural activities of Charter 77 supporters in
Prague. This message reports developments symptomatic of the current
crackdown. End summary.
1. Addressees will be aware of reports that Czechoslovak and Polish
authorities prevented planned third meeting of Charter 77 and KOR
(Workers Defense Committee) reps weekend of October 1–2 and
Charter spokesman Jaroslav Sabata was detained and beaten.
2. We have obtained copy of bulletin no. 41 of Committee for
Protection of Unjustly Persecuted (Prague 1339 Notal),3 small offshoot
of Charter movement. Bulletin gives account of events based on report
by Vaclav Havel, who was among Chartists attempting to meet with
Poles, and other, unidentified, sources.
3. That account says meeting was supposed to take place October
1 on trail of Czechoslovak-Polish friendship in Krkonos mountains.
(This is approximately same area as that where first meeting was held.)
Area was full of uniformed and plainclothes police from both countries
who checked papers of everyone entering area. Six Chartists, including
Sabata and Havel, and a student attempted to reach rendezvous by
various means. Some were detained by police, while others withdrew
when they saw meeting was impossible. Chartist Jiri Bednar was
Confidential. Sent to Belgrade, East Berlin, Bern, Bonn, Bucharest, Budapest, London,
Moscow, Paris, Rome, Sofia, Warsaw, Munich, USNATO, and West Berlin.
slovak Party Secretary Jan Fojtik and Polish First Secretary Edward Gierek in Poland.
Prague, October 6, reported “unusual willingness of GOC to permit emigration, particu-
larly of people who have evinced disaffection with system.” (National Archives, RG 59,
Central Foreign Policy File, D780412–0226)
brutality against Charter 77 members, either as a new hardening of the GOC line on
dissidence, or as a result of the visit Soviet leader Leonid Brezhnev was scheduled to

Czechoslovakia
detained and questioned several hours in tourist kiosk, from which he
says he saw Polish police round up KOR members Jan Litynski, Adam
Michnik and Piotr Naimsky. Detained Czechs were held in various
places for up to 59 hours and most then released. Sabata, however,
was held first in village jail and punched about by uniformed police,
then reportedly was transferred to Ministry of Justice jail in Hradec
Kralove. There he is said to have been officially charged with violating
two articles of penal code relating to using force and verbal abuse
against public officials. This account leaves unclear whether Sabata
still in detention, but rumors in Prague as of October 6 say he is.
Account concludes by denying that Sabata in any way resisted police
and stating he is being persecuted. It proclaims development of cooper-
ation between Czechoslovak and Polish human rights supporters
cannot be stopped.
4. Comment: Whether or not meeting of Polish and Czechoslovak
Party Ideological Secretaries last month (ref A) led to this cooperative
move against dissidents, such cooperation is obviously under way.
Report cited above also says police were allegedly also watching other
border tourist areas suitable for meeting, but we suspect police had
enough information from Charter leaks to pinpoint actual rendezvous.
Beating of Sabata could have been action of undisciplined rural police,
but placing of formal charges against him almost certainly was directed
from Prague. It suggests authorities have become sufficiently concerned
about developing Charter-KOR ties to shift to heavyhanded efforts to
intimidate potential participants in future border meetings. End
comment.
5. In other Chartist activity, Pavel Kohout has renewed his quest
for permission for self and wife to make short visit to Western Europe
and the United States, but so far has received no travel documentation.
His daughter Teresa tells us Kohout and wife would like to depart the
week of October 16 for Switzerland (where Kohout may wish to visit
another daughter presently studying in Geneva, as well as his Swiss
publisher). Comment: Kohout has been telling friends he hopes to
return to Prague after forthcoming visits to the West, but we doubt he
will be able to do so in light of longstanding warnings from Party
officials that if he leaves, he cannot return.
6. Teresa Kohoutova indicates police have begun to intimidate those
involved in recent productions of Macbeth. She was taken from a family
dinner party October 5 for three hours’ interrogation, including threats to
desist from further non-sanctioned acting. She reports Vlasta Chromastova,
talented former actress who has been playing Lady Macbeth in Kohout’s
version of the Shakespeare classic, has also been interrogated at length.
Moreover, police recently broke up a performance of the play, and when
it was rescheduled, blocked would-be audience from attending it.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
7. We understand artist Karel Havlicke and wife, who applied for
emigration permission some weeks ago, have been told they will
“never” receive exit documentation, but this appears not to have been
a formal statement. If Havlickes are, in fact, refused exit permits, it
will run counter to trend we thought developing (ref B) of regime’s
increasing resort to emigration as one way to cope with dissidents.
8. Comment. We see numerous signs at present of increasing activ-
ism by internal security agents. The beating of Sabata and apparent
overall tightening of controls over machinations of Charter 77 personal-
ities are the most dramatic evidence of this trend. We believe it is
mainly increased politicizing of the Charter 77 movement—especially
the August 10th anniversary statement calling for withdrawal of Soviet
troops and recent efforts to coordinate human rights appeals with
Polish and other Eastern European activists—that has led to the current
crackdown. We wonder whether much-publicized tightening of inter-
nal security controls over foreign representatives in Washington, result-
ing for example in protracted delay of visa issuance to GOC LOS
delegate Richard Kral, may also be contributing to a strengthening of
internal security measures here.
Byrne

Czechoslovakia
107.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
Czechoslovakia1
148769. Subject: (C) Protest to Czechoslovak Ambassador Over
1. (C-entire text)
2. EUR Assistant Secretary Vest called on Czechoslovak Ambassa-
dor Johanes on June 8 to protest the May 29 arrest of Czechoslovak
dissidents. HA Deputy Assistant Secretary Schneider and Czechoslo-
vak Desk Officer were present. Following is a summary of the
discussion.
3. Noting that he was speaking in the context of our efforts to
improve bilateral relations, Vest cited the recent arrests and protested
them as violations of the dissidents’ human rights and as inconsistent
with the principles of the Helsinki Final Act. Vest said that, as publicity
increases, these arrests will negatively affect congressional and public
opinion and cannot help but have an adverse effect on bilateral
relations.
4. Johanes said he was unaware of the arrests since local media
had not yet carried anything about them, but he personally rejected
the protest as constituting interference in Czechoslovakia’s internal
affairs. Johanes said only a person who violates the law is imprisoned
in Czechoslovakia and that the law and the courts are an internal
Confidential; Immediate. Drafted by Glenn; cleared by Schneider and Schmidt; approved
by Vest. Sent for information to Belgrade, East Berlin, Bonn, Budapest, Moscow, Sofia,
Vienna, Warsaw, Bucharest, Munich, and USNATO. In telegram 1724 from Prague, May
31, the Embassy reported the arrests of several prominent Charter 77 members, possibly
preemptive to the Papal visit to Poland. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
Policy File, D790245–1053) Following the arrests, the Department of State’s Bureau of
European Affairs tried to hold off any official protests pushed for by the Department’s
Bureau of Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs, in the hope that dissidents would
be released shortly after the end of the Papal visit. When formal charges were brought
against the majority of dissidents arrested, the Department moved ahead with formal
Policy File, D790249–0810)
as “the GOC’s most serious action against individuals connected with the Charter 77
movement since the beginning” and “a palpable change for the worse in the GOC’s
already deplorable policy toward dissidents.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
that all arrested individuals were connected with the Committee for the Defense of the
Unjustly Persecuted (CDUP), an offshoot of Charter 77, and that of the 16 people arrested
6 were released shortly after, while 10 remained in detention and faced charges. (National

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
affair. The Czechoslovak Government does not like interference in
Czechoslovakia’s internal affairs. Johanes mentioned a number of let-
ters he had recently received on behalf of a prisoner in Czechoslovakia
serving a three-year sentence and wondered if this letter-writing cam-
paign was not the concoction of persons interested in harming relations.
5. Vest noted that the signatories of the Final Act shared common
objectives. When a country’s laws and practices conflict with these
objectives, all signatories are properly concerned. Such conflicts in
Czechoslovakia will entail certain consequences in the United States.
The point is that the Czechoslovak Government must act with these
consequences in mind.
6. Schneider supported Vest’s statement and added that the USG
would be willing to examine closely any conflicts between its laws and
practices and the Final Act which the Czechoslovak Government cared
to raise.
7. Ambassador Johanes observed that none of the Charter 77 dissi-
dents has been jailed for having signed the Charter or having exercised
their right of free expression. If the Czechoslovak Government recently
arrested some dissidents, they had violated the law.
8. Johanes said that the Final Act also provided for free trade, yet
the US had not yet extended MFN tariff status to Czechoslovakia. The
Final Act was intended to dispose of the remnants of World War II,
yet the US still refused to return Czechoslovakia’s gold. Johanes added
that the US Government maintains relations with many countries
around the world which have poor human rights records, in many
cases much worse than Czechoslovakia’s.
9. In response to Vest’s request, Johanes said he would inform the
Czechoslovak Government of our protest and inquire about the arrests.
10. Action requested: The Ambassador should make an approach
along the lines of the above to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.3
Christopher
3 Ambassador Meehan delivered the démarche to Jablonsky on June 13. Describing
the meeting as “frank and brisk,” Meehan reported that Jablonsky began their discussions
by rejecting Vest’s démarche to Ambassador Johanes, describing it as “an unsubstantiated
attack and gross interference in [Czechoslovak] internal affairs.” Meehan reported that
he stressed that “human rights is a key feature of our foreign policy and a matter of
great concern to Congress and the public.” (Telegram 1958 from Prague, June 15; National

Czechoslovakia
108.
Intelligence Assessment Prepared in the Central Intelligence
Agency1
Washington, August 1979
The Czechoslovak Leadership [classification not declassified]
Key Judgments
Gustav Husak has been strengthening his position and will proba-
bly remain the leader of the Czechoslovak Communist Party for at
least the next several years.
Current trends within the party leadership appear to favor those
with a relatively moderate, pragmatic outlook over their more conserv-
ative, ideologically minded counterparts.
These developments suggest that there will be a gradually increas-
ing movement toward economic innovation and a tendency to bargain
harder in economic dealings with the Soviet Union to the extent allowed
by Czechoslovak dependence on Soviet oil.
Strict internal political controls will continue, however, and
Czechoslovak foreign policy will remain closely aligned with Moscow.
[less than 1 line not declassified]
A Stable, Cautious Leadership
The top ranks of the Czechoslovak leadership have changed little
since the years immediately following the 1968 Warsaw Pact invasion,
which ended Alexander Dubcek’s liberal experiment and left Gustav
Husak with the task of reimposing strict Communist control. Husak
has led the Czechoslovak Communist Party (KSC) since April 1969
and has served as President of the Republic since May 1975. The federal,
Czech, and Slovak Premiers and the First Secretary of the Slovak Com-
munist Party (KSS) have held office since January 1970 or earlier. All
but one of the KSC Presidium’s 13 members and candidate members
have served on that body since May 1971 or before. [classification not
declassified]
The paucity of personnel changes has been matched by a dearth
of innovation in policy. The political composition of the leadership
ranges from cautious pragmatists through conservative ideologues.
Leadership: An Intelligence Assessment. Confidential. The report was prepared in the
USSR-Eastern Europe Division, Office of Political Analysis, and coordinated within OPA
and with the Offices of Scientific Intelligence, Economic Research, and Central Reference
and the National Intelligence Officer for Soviet and East European Affairs.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
Hobbled by internal rivalries, devoid of popular support, reluctant to
risk Soviet displeasure, and presided over by a moderate conservative
with neither the political strength nor the inclination to undertake bold
new ventures, the regime ranks among the most cautious in contempo-
rary Eastern Europe. [classification not declassified]
To characterize individuals within the leadership is a risky under-
taking. Information on internal debate is scarce and often suspect.
Individual positions on specific issues may reflect regional interests,
personal rivalries, or momentary considerations, rather than basic polit-
ical outlook. As in other East European countries, terms like “moder-
ate,” “conservative,” “pragmatist,” and “ideologue” can be applied
only in a relative sense. [classification not declassified]
With these qualifications, it is useful to distinguish between two
basic points of view within the party hierarchy. One is more conserva-
tive, prone to think in terms of ideology and protective of the status quo.
Its dominant concern is to avoid a repetition of 1968, when relaxation
of controls permitted the growth of forces that threatened the party’s
monopoly of political power. Adherents of this view regard with suspi-
cion any inclination toward leniency, either toward current dissidents
or toward those who supported the 1968 liberalization. Presidium
members subscribing to this outlook include Vasil Bilak, Antonin
Kapek, Karel Hoffmann, Alois Indra, and Milos Jakes. [classification not
declassified]
Other Presidium members are believed to hold more moderate,
pragmatic views. They are more open to innovation, at least in the
economic sphere, and would probably not oppose some political relaxa-
tion if the overall political climate in Prague and Moscow were to allow
it. Adherents of this view include Josef Kempny, Lubomir Strougal,
Jozef Lenart, and Peter Colotka. [classification not declassified]
General Secretary Gustav Husak probably finds this division both
a strength and a weakness as it affects his leadership: a strength because
it tends to prevent any potential rival from amassing preponderant
support; a weakness because it impedes the formulation of policy.
Husak has faced challengers from both camps during the past decade,
but the number of potential rivals is greater among the conservatives.
Husak, accordingly, has tended to side with the moderates, and it is
they who have benefited from the strengthening of his position in
recent years. [classification not declassified]
Intraparty Debate: Husak Dominant
Gustav Husak was not the Soviet Union’s first choice in August
1968 to lead Czechoslovakia back to orthodoxy. As deputy premier
from April through August, he had fully supported the reformers’
Action Program, which Moscow deeply distrusted. Immediately after
the invasion, however, Husak began cultivating the confidence of the

Czechoslovakia
Soviet leaders. His greatest service was to persuade the KSS to repudiate
the clandestine KSC Congress of 22 August 1968, which had con-
demned the invasion, endorsed Dubcek, and otherwise defied Soviet
wishes. Elected KSS First Secretary and a member of the KSC Presidium,
Husak adopted positions designed to ingratiate himself further with
Moscow. His longstanding espousal of federalization also assured him
the support of his fellow Slovaks. By April 1969, the Soviet Union
considered him sufficiently reliable to succeed Dubcek as KSC First
Secretary. [classification not declassified]
Although Husak had won a degree of Soviet confidence, he was
not given free rein. Aware that reprisals against supporters of the late
reforms would be highly unpopular, he reportedly favored greater
leniency than Moscow was willing to allow. As “normalization” pro-
ceeded, Husak’s attempts at moderation were overruled, presumably
with Soviet approval, by a coterie of conservatives, the most militant
being Vasil Bilak and Antonin Kapek. The hardliners succeeded in
securing the ouster of some 300,000 party members by the end of 1970
and have since managed—against Husak’s publicly stated preference—
to block any meaningful rehabilitation. [classification not declassified]
Discord between Husak and the more conservative Presidium
members has not been confined to the issue of purges and rehabilitation.
In recent years, debate over economic policy has moved increasingly
to the fore. At the 15th Party Congress in April 1976, both Husak and
Premier Lubomir Strougal called for innovation in this area. Their
proposals disturbed ideological hardliners, one of whom, Milos Jakes,
responded with a warning that the need to maintain effective party
control must be paramount over other considerations. [classification not
declassified]
The prospect of economic innovation is repugnant to the conserva-
tives for two reasons. It raises again the issues of the early 1960s, which
paved the way for Dubcek’s liberalization, and it holds implications
for cadre policy that the ideologues must regard as threatening: if the
party is to preside over a major economic reorganization, then the
criteria for evaluating members must be substantially revised. Instead
of ideological orthodoxy and political reliability, which have prevailed
since 1970 and have created the conservatives’ political base, members
must be judged primarily for their managerial efficiency and technical
expertise. As these criteria are progressively applied, the position of
the conservatives will weaken, to the benefit of Husak and the moderate
pragmatists within the leadership. [classification not declassified]
Calls for economic innovation and exhortations to improve the
performance of party cadres were conspicuously juxtaposed in state-
ments by party leaders during the months following the 15th Congress,
when strenuous behind-the-scenes debate apparently took place. The

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
issue came to a head at the KSC Central Committee plenum in Decem-
ber 1977, when Husak reportedly was again challenged by hardline
opponents. Although information on the episode is sketchy, subsequent
developments strongly suggest that the outcome represented a victory
for Husak and the moderates. [classification not declassified]
The results of the plenum first became apparent in a series of
personnel changes. Jakes, who had directed the purges of the early
1970s as chairman of the Central Control and Auditing Commission,
was removed from that position and elected secretary of the KSC
Central Committee and candidate member of the Presidium. Nomi-
nally, this represented an advancement. In real terms, however, Jakes’s
fortunes probably suffered. He lost his key role in cadre affairs and
was made responsible for agriculture, where he has no experience and
which could prove a perilous assignment. Moreover, two men whose
views are unlikely to coincide with his were elected to the Secretariat
at the same time: Mikulas Beno, an economist with close ties to Husak,
and Jindrich Polednik, a youth leader who has stressed the need for
economic improvement in a way that appears consistent with moderate
thinking. [classification not declassified]
Developments continued to favor the moderates through 1978. In
March, the Central Committee removed from the Secretariat Cestmir
Lovetinsky, a hardliner who had led the party’s cadre department since
1975. Lovetinsky’s cadre duties were assigned to Beno, and another
loyal Husak supporter, economist Josef Haman, replaced him as a
member of the Secretariat. Husak also used the March plenum to
endorse an experiment in economic management devised by Finance
Minister Leopold Ler. This controversial movement toward economic
reform had apparently been approved over conservative opposition at
the December plenum. [classification not declassified]
Another indication of Husak’s strength was a reaffirmation of sup-
port from Soviet leader Leonid Brezhnev during the latter’s visit to
Prague in May 1978. Brezhnev’s increased esteem for Husak had
already become apparent in May 1975, when Soviet Politburo member
Andrey Kirilenko spoke of the “close and personal” relationship
between the two. During the May 1978 visit, Brezhnev awarded Husak
the Order of the October Revolution and referred to him as the “leading
representative of Czechoslovak Communists.” Brezhnev then pre-
sented the Order of Lenin to Bilak, whom he described as “a loyal
colleague of Comrade Husak.” The continuing role of the conservatives
was thus acknowledged, but their subordinate position was made clear.
[classification not declassified]
Most signs indicate that Husak will remain the dominant figure
within the Czechoslovak leadership for at least the next several years.
At 66, his health is good. [4 lines not declassified; classification not
declassified]

Czechoslovakia
Recent developments within the party continue to favor Husak
and the pragmatists. The December 1978 plenum called for an exchange
of party cards, the first since 1970, to take place this year. It stated that
in evaluating members, “fulfillment of economic tasks” would be linked
with the “assessment of political commitment.” This represents a clear
departure from the preoccupation with ideology that prevailed
throughout the preceding decade. With Husak supporter Mikulas Beno
directing cadre affairs on the Secretariat and Jakes removed from the
Central Control and Auditing Commission, the conservatives will be
hard put to prevent the exchange from being used to weaken their
position in the party. [classification not declassified]
Political developments outside the party also favor Husak. By
maintaining a relatively high standard of living, he has kept the pop-
ulation tranquil since massive arrests ended student demonstra-
tions in August 1969. The public has adopted a mood of cynical
materialism, refusing to involve itself in a political situation it is power-
less to change. A hard core of dissidents remains active, causing the
government some embarrassment, but the dissenters have so far failed
to evoke a significant popular response. The regime has kept the dissi-
dents off balance by encouraging selective emigration while maintain-
ing strict repression at home—an example of the latter being the pend-
ing trial of 10 human rights activists arrested in May 1979. [classification
not declassified]
Husak’s success in limiting the effectiveness of the dissident move-
ment has doubtless contributed to the strength of his position. He is
unlikely to expose himself to conservative charges of laxity toward
dissent or risk alienating his supporters in Moscow by adopting a more
tolerant approach. In the near term the changes now under way could
lead to tighter political controls as Husak and the moderates strive to
keep the new policies in hand. [classification not declassified]
Two possible developments damaging to Husak would be a rise
in popular discontent because of worsened economic conditions or a
loss of Soviet support. Recent events have drawn increased attention
to these possibilities. During a visit to Prague in May 1979, Soviet
Premier Aleksey Kosygin criticized Czechoslovak “sluggishness” in
planning and implementing cooperative projects. Premier Strougal
countered with the complaint that the requirements Moscow was levy-
ing for the construction of nuclear power equipment represented a
considerable burden to Czechoslovakia’s engineering industry and
would reduce its capacity to manufacture products for hard currency
sales in the West. Strougal made the same point publicly during the
June summit meeting of the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance
(CEMA), where a cooperative agreement on the production of nuclear
power equipment was signed. Implicit in his remarks was the warning

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
that diversion of resources to nuclear engineering will eventually
adversely affect the Czechoslovak consumer. [classification not declassified]
These events suggest that the leadership in Prague has adopted a
more assertive tone in its economic dealings with Moscow. They also
underscore the problems the leadership will face in attempting to main-
tain a standard of living high enough to preserve the passive mood of
the population. Nonetheless, the recent developments appear to pose
no immediate threat to Husak. Although it will be increasingly difficult
for the regime to continue to meet the rising expectations of con-
sumers—a point underscored by recent steep increases in the price of
gasoline and certain other goods—living standards are unlikely to
worsen so abruptly as to provoke a sharp change in popular attitudes,
so long as other factors influencing public opinion remain constant.
Moreover, any sign of increased popular discontent would strengthen
Prague’s argument for economic concessions from Moscow. Husak
could also take advantage of Czechoslovakia’s high credit rating to
alleviate the situation through hard currency loans, a course he has so
far avoided.2 [classification not declassified]
Moscow is unlikely to halt its support of Husak in the near future.
Two days after Strougal’s outspoken address at the CEMA meeting, a
Soviet delegation visiting Prague praised Husak as “the acknowledged
and esteemed leader of the Czechoslovak Communists.” Even if Brezh-
nev were succeeded by a leadership ideologically more akin to the
Czechoslovak hardliners, the new Soviet rulers would hardly wish
to compound the uncertainties of their own transition by summarily
ousting the leader of one of their most stable East European allies. The
succession period in Moscow should tend to strengthen Husak’s tenure,
at least in the near term. [classification not declassified]
On the other hand, divisions within the Czechoslovak leadership
are likely to sharpen further if, as seems probable, the moderates are
behind the new firmness toward Moscow. To forestall conservative
criticism and minimize tensions with the Soviet leadership, Prague’s
moderates are likely to continue espousing Soviet positions on noneco-
nomic matters. This tendency could retard the improvement of relations
with the West. [classification not declassified]
Contenders for the Succession
Husak’s eventual successor will almost surely come from the cur-
rent leadership. Factors influencing the selection will include to various
2 Czechoslovakia has the lowest ratio of debt service to merchandise exports to
non-Communist countries of any of the East European countries. In 1978, Czechoslova-
kia’s debt service ratio was an estimated 20 percent, compared with 77 percent for Poland,
roughly 40 percent for East Germany, and about 30 percent for Hungary. [Footnote is
in the original.]

Czechoslovakia
degrees nationality, performance in office, popular acceptability, Soviet
preferences, and political trends at the time of succession. [classification
not declassified]
Leading conservative contenders include Bilak, Kapek, Indra, and
perhaps Jakes. Bilak, 62, ranks second in the KSC hierarchy and is
believed to have the support of hardliners within the Soviet leadership,
particularly in ideological circles. Nonetheless, most observers give
him little chance of succeeding Husak because of his nationality. Born
in Ruthenia, he would be considered a Slovak, and it is virtually a
political necessity that the next KSC leader be a Czech. Moreover,
Bilak is unpopular with Czechoslovaks of all nationalities because he
supported the 1968 invasion and has pursued a consistently hard line
on rehabilitation. [classification not declassified]
After Bilak, the most prominent conservative is Antonin Kapek.
As first secretary of the Prague KSC committee, Kapek heads the party’s
most powerful regional organization. Like Bilak, he enjoys strong back-
ing from Soviet conservatives, and he maintains close contacts with the
Moscow municipal party organization. An ultraconservative, Kapek
flaunted his pro-Soviet sympathies immediately after the invasion and
has been associated with the most hardline elements of the KSC. His
selection as Husak’s successor would be unpalatable not only to the
population at large, but to much of the present Czechoslovak leader-
ship. [classification not declassified]
Alois Indra, 58, chairman of the Federal Assembly, was Moscow’s
choice to head a “revolutionary government” in August 1968, but the
scheme failed in the face of Dubcek’s massive popular support. Indra
suffered another setback in December 1971, when he “resigned” from
the KSC Secretariat to assume his present, largely ceremonial position.
Indra is politically astute and could count on Soviet support, but his
long absence from full-time party activity and his unpopularity stem-
ming from 1968 are considerable obstacles to his becoming head of the
party. [classification not declassified]
Jakes, 56, has been considered a potential rival to Husak since the
early 1970s, when he directed the purges as chairman of the Central
Control and Auditing Commission. His appointment as a party secre-
tary and candidate member of the Presidium in December 1977
appeared to be a major step in a rapidly advancing career. As noted
above, however, Jakes’s loss of responsibility for cadre affairs may
represent a considerable setback, and he will find it difficult to achieve
distinction overseeing Czechoslovak agriculture. His best chance for
the succession would probably be as a compromise candidate in the
event of a deadlock among more senior conservative contenders. [classi-
fication not declassified]
If the trends described above continue, Husak’s successor is more
likely to be a moderate than a conservative. The foremost candidates

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
on this end of the spectrum are Josef Kempny and Lubomir Strougal.
[classification not declassified]
Several factors give Kempny, 59, an edge over other contenders.
He enjoys the confidence and support of Husak, who has secured his
appointment to a succession of key party positions. Aside from Husak,
Kempny and Bilak are the only full Presidium members who are also
party secretaries. Kempny bears no stigma from 1968; as mayor of
Ostrava, he managed to win Soviet confidence without antagonizing
his own countrymen. He also boasts a wide range of experience. A
construction engineer by training, he assumed responsibility for ideo-
logical affairs in 1969 as a KSC secretary and chairman of the party’s
ideological commission. He was intensively involved in cadre work as
chairman of the Bureau for Party Work in the Czech Lands in 1970–71.
Since then, he has been chairman of the Central Committee’s economic
commission, and oversight of the economy has also been his primary
responsibility on the Presidium. Kempny’s Presidium responsibilities
may have increased after the December 1977 plenum. While losing
some of his more specialized economic duties, which are now per-
formed within the Secretariat, he retained general oversight of the
economy and reportedly received in addition the key areas of defense
and security. [classification not declassified]
Against these assets, certain liabilities must be counted. If the politi-
cal tide were to turn, Kempny’s close association with Husak could
work to his disadvantage. Moreover, his longstanding responsibility
for economic policy renders him vulnerable because of continuing
problems in that sphere. Kempny reportedly was attacked along with
Husak at the December 1977 plenum, and rumors of his imminent
departure circulated in late 1978. There has been no subsequent evi-
dence, however, that he is in trouble. [classification not declassified]
The other leading moderate contender for the succession, Lubomir
Strougal, suffered a reverse similar to Indra’s when he was appointed
Premier in January 1970; the appointment cost him his position as KSC
secretary and chairman of the Bureau for Party Work in the Czech
Lands—a role to which Kempny succeeded. Strougal is still young (55),
however, and politically adroit; like Indra, he has managed to retain
considerable influence while having little day-to-day involvement in
party affairs. As a contender to succeed Husak, he has two principal
liabilities. Having been Premier for nearly a decade, he must, like
Kempny, bear a large share of the blame for the poor state of the
economy. He may also be less acceptable to Moscow than other candi-
dates. As acting premier in August 1968, Strougal condemned the
occupation, an act of defiance he later recanted. As noted above, he
was host during Kosygin’s visit to Prague in May when disagreements
arose over economic issues, and he stated Czechoslovakia’s grievances

Czechoslovakia
publicly at the CEMA summit in June. Although this role will increase
Strougal’s popularity with the Czechoslovak public and enhance his
stature among moderates within the leadership, Moscow may try to
ensure that Husak’s successor represents a viewpoint more amenable
to Soviet wishes. [classification not declassified]
The possibility of a dark horse cannot be excluded. Sentiment must
be strong in both Prague and Moscow for removing the shadow of
1968 from Czechoslovak political life. It is also highly desirable that
the next party leader be competent in economics, an area where the
current leaders have proved deficient. These considerations suggest
the possibility of a younger contender with a technical background.
One such candidate is party secretary Josef Haman, 46, who was elected
to his present post in March 1978. A graduate of the Leningrad Institute
for Finance and Economics, Haman was active in the party’s youth
movement before occupying a series of administrative posts. He served
in the Central Committee’s economic department and economic com-
mission in 1971–73, then joined Husak’s staff in the office of the KSC
General Secretary. He became head of the office of the President in
1976. A recent indication of Haman’s standing was his selection in May
1979 to deliver the keynote speech at the annual ceremony commemo-
rating Czechoslovakia’s liberation; in recent years this honor has been
reserved for younger members of the leadership whose stars are on
the rise. Haman, like Kempny, could eventually find Husak’s patronage
a liability, but in the event of a factional struggle over the leadership,
his relative newness to the political scene would be a powerful asset.
[classification not declassified]
Policy Implications
If these trends continue, Gustav Husak will probably remain the
General Secretary of the Czechoslovak Communist Party for at least
the next several years. Developments within the party will tend to
lessen the influence of the conservative ideologues, while increasing
that of the moderate pragmatists. When Husak relinquishes some or
all of his functions, his successor will probably come from the latter
group. [classification not declassified]
These developments within the leadership will have a gradual
but significant effect on policy. Strict political controls will continue.
Economic experimentation will proceed, probably at an accelerating
pace. Czechoslovakia will continue to cultivate Western markets for its
exports and will bargain harder in its economic dealings with Moscow.
Overall foreign policy, however, will remain closely aligned with that
of the Soviet Union. The pace of improvement in relations with the
West will remain limited and, for the near term at least, may even slow
down. [classification not declassified]

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
109.
Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the
Department of State (Tarnoff) to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, September 21, 1979
SUBJECT
Proposal to Negotiate a New Claims Settlement with Czechoslovakia
The Department of State has prepared a new proposal for an agree-
ment with Czechoslovakia to settle the outstanding claims of American
citizens and to effect the return of the Nazi-looted gold to the Czechoslo-
vak Government as mandated in Presidential Directive 21.2 We plan to
present the proposal to the Czechoslovaks early this fall after consulting
with interested Members of Congress and the claimants.3
We believe that moving now to resolve this longstanding issue is
in the best interest of the claimants and our own foreign policy interests
and has reasonable prospects for success. The several thousand Ameri-
can claimants who will benefit from the agreement have been waiting
for just and adequate compensation for their nationalized properties
for more than thirty years. Many of them are elderly and of limited
financial means and, in their contacts with the Department of State, they
have stressed their need. Representatives of Czechoslovak-American
organizations also support the negotiation of a new claims settlement
agreement as soon as possible. We do not anticipate significant domes-
tic political opposition to such action and we will be able to defend
the negotiation of a new agreement strongly since it is clearly in the
interest of the claimants and in our own national interest.
We are also being urged to move promptly by the British Govern-
ment which is understandably impatient to bring into force its own
1964 claims settlement with Czechoslovakia which is contingent on the
return of the gold. On September 11, the British informed the Depart-
indicates it was drafted in EUR by Johnson and Glenn and cleared by Nimetz, Vest, Barry,
Walker (S/P), Crook (L/EUR), Schmidt (EUR/EE), Peters (EB/IFD/OMA), Weston (H),
and in the Department of Treasury by Solomon and the Department of Commerce by
Jenkins. (National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Assistant Legal Adviser for European
2 See Document 16.
3 A meeting between Department officials and congressional staff members took
place on Capitol Hill three days later. (Memorandum of conversation, September 26;
National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Assistant Legal Adviser for European Affairs,

Czechoslovakia
ment that they are seriously considering a proposal to return the portion
of the Czechoslovak gold they hold to facilitate resolution of their
claims, a development which would clearly weaken our bargaining
position.4
In considering the timing of a proposal we have borne in mind
the generally poor human rights record of the Czechoslovak Govern-
believe that we should defer making a proposal on these grounds. In
fact, given the apparent differences within the Czechoslovak leadership
on the issue of whether to proceed with the trials of the Charter 77
activists, we believe that prompt tabling of a claims/gold proposal
might help to tilt the balance against those arguing for harsh punish-
ment. In any event, we expect the claims/gold negotiations to drag
out for a considerable time given our tough proposal, and we can
adjust the pace—and even suspend the negotiations if necessary—in
order to react to the outcome of the trials. We will of course make
our disapproval of any trials of Charter 77 activists very clear to the
Czechoslovaks in both the bilateral and CSCE contexts when and if
such trials occur.
referendum claims settlement agreement with Czechoslovakia be rene-
gotiated and submitted to Congress for its approval. All of the Members
of Congress with whom we have spoken or with whom the issue has
been discussed, including Senator Long who was chiefly responsible
for the Congressional repudiation of the 1974 agreement, clearly favor
moving ahead to resolve this matter. We believe that we will be able
to negotiate a new agreement providing enough compensation for the
American claimants to be acceptable to Senator Long. Treasury and
we plan to consult with key Members of Congress, including Senator
Long, before tabling the new proposal and to continue consultations
with them throughout the negotiations. Now that the US/PRC claims
settlement agreement has been accepted by Congress and a US/PRC
4 The Department reported the British response to Senator Long’s proposal to vest
the Czechoslovak gold unilaterally in telegram 240364 to Prague, September 12. In its
response, the United Kingdom stated: “After full consideration in London, we have
concluded that this proposal, if carried out, would be illegal under the terms of the Paris
Agreement as was explicitly recognized in 1974 by all three governments represented
on the Tripartite Commission.” The British stressed, “we very much hope that you will
not try to proceed with this form of action and that it will be possible for you instead
to make a renewed effort to resolve your claims against Czechoslovakia by negotiation.”
Czechoslovak dissidents.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
trade agreement has been signed,6 we do not anticipate Congressional
opposition to negotiations with the Czechoslovak Government. Given
the substantial increase in the price of gold since 1974 and the more
than $175 million which will accrue to the Czechoslovaks with the
return of the gold, we may nevertheless encounter the criticism that
any settlement short of 100% is too low.
The Czechoslovak Government has recently expressed interest in
renegotiating the 1974 ad referendum agreement. Premier Strougal
informed our Ambassador on July 3 that his Government does not
insist on the terms of the 1974 agreement and that “everything is
possible” with regard to renegotiation.7 Acting Foreign Minister Knizka
was more specific on August 15 when he indicated to the Ambassador
that the Czechoslovaks might be willing to go as high as a fifty percent
settlement.8 This new-found willingness of the Czechoslovak Govern-
ment to consider a substantial improvement in the terms of the 1974
agreement suggests that we now have the best opportunity in five
years to reach an agreement acceptable to all parties.
Our new proposal will be substantially more advantageous to
American claimants than the 1974 agreement and even provides for a
higher percentage return than the recent PRC claims settlement. It will
provide for:
—A total settlement of approximately $51 million, including the
$9 million we obtained from the sale of vested Czechoslovak steel mill
—A down-payment of $20 million and five annual payments of
approximately $4.4 million each.
—The return of the 18.4 metric tons of Czechoslovak gold in the
custody of the Tripartite Gold Commission for the Restitution of Mone-
tary Gold upon receipt of the down-payment of $20 million. Approxi-
6 The U.S. Government and the Government of the People’s Republic of China
reached an agreement on the settlement of claims of U.S. citizens against the PRC on
7 The conversation between Ambassador Meehan and Prime Minister Strougal was
Policy File, D790302–0782)
8 Ambassador Meehan met Acting Foreign Minister Knizka on August 15 to follow
up on the visit by Congressman Vanik’s delegation to Prague. In telegram 2844 from
Prague, August 16, the Embassy reported that the Czechoslovak Government was consid-
ering a settlement figure between CZK47–50 on the dollar. Knizka told Meehan “percent-
age is not all important; good relations with the US and trade and MFN were the
important things to GOC.” He also stressed that the GOC was willing “to show goodwill”
on cultural projects as well as planning to “propose an exchange of instruments of
ratification of consular agreement.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
File, D790372–1121)

Czechoslovakia
mately 45 percent of the gold, worth about $80 million at current prices,
is physically in the United States.
—The retention of the 1974 ad referendum agreement’s other provi-
sions, including payment in full, in installments, of Czechoslovakia’s
surplus property debt to the USG of approximately $4.9 million; the
release of two blocked US bank accounts in Prague containing approxi-
mately 7.2 million Czechoslovak crowns; and the agreement of the
Czechoslovak Government to begin negotiations with the US Foreign
Bondholders Protective Council on defaulted bonds within six months
of the effective date of the agreement. We will also continue to resist
attempts by Czechoslovakia to link the agreement in any way to the
granting of MFN or the extension of credits.
The 1974 ad referendum agreement provided for total compensation
pal. Our new proposal would provide for compensation of 70 percent
of the outstanding principal. For purposes of comparison, we have
settled with other Eastern European countries as follows: Poland, 39
(Bulgarian assets vested in the US were substantial, and the Bulgarian
cash payment was only $4 million); and Yugoslavia, 91 percent (Yugo-
slavia also had substantial assets in the US and was looking for friends
at the time of the settlement in 1948). The recent PRC settlement of 42
percent involved a total payment of $80.5 million on an outstanding
principal of $190 million.
Treasury concurs in our proposal to negotiate a new claims settle-
ment on these terms.
Peter Tarnoff

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
110.
Report Prepared in the Bureau of Intelligence and Research,
Department of State1
Report No. 1249
Washington, October 11, 1979
THE HUMAN RIGHTS MOVEMENT IN CZECHOSLOVAKIA
Summary
The Charter 77 movement—approaching the third anniversary of
its establishment—has successfully focused attention on the human
rights violations in Czechoslovakia and on the repressive policies of
the regime. In doing so, it has gained considerable sympathy and
support in the West, as well as among other dissidents in Eastern
Europe and the USSR.
From the outset, the Charter movement has had to cope with
formidable obstacles:
—constant harassment and intimidation from a regime taking its
cue from Moscow;
—divisions within its membership over tactics and strategy; and
—difficulties in gaining popular support for its goals.
Despite recent efforts by the regime to suppress the movement,
Charter activists vow to continue their human rights struggle. How-
ever, prospects for the future look bleak; there is little chance that
Charter efforts, by and of themselves, will improve the human rights
situation in Czechoslovakia.
Background
Charter 77 was established in January 1977. Its spokesmen asserted
that there was no intention to constitute a political organization or to
function as a political opposition to advance reforms or changes. The
signatories of the Charter claimed to have banded together as a form
of “citizens’ initiative,” which they said was common in both East and
West. Its first manifesto, “Charter 77,” criticized the regime’s failure
to honor the human and civil rights provisions in the Czechoslovak
Constitution, the Helsinki Final Act, and three UN Human Rights
Covenants which had been ratified by the government and had become
part of Czechoslovak law.
by Stoddart and Costolanski; approved by Baraz. According to a stamped notation, the
report was an “advance copy” for “personal use prior to approval for wider distribution.”

Czechoslovakia
The Charter stated that the authorities had the duty to abide by
international agreements and Czechoslovak law, and that many basic
human rights existed only on paper. It sought to engage the regime
in a “constructive dialogue” by drawing attention to specific violations
of civil and human rights, suggesting solutions, submitting proposals
to further and to guarantee those rights, and acting as a “mediator in
conflict situations.”
It claimed—correctly—that among the rights consistently violated
by the regime were:
—the right to work at one’s profession, regardless of political
convictions;
—the right for children to be educated, regardless of the parents’
political convictions;
—freedom of expression;
—freedom of religion;
—freedom of assembly;
—freedom to participate in public affairs;
—equality before the law; and
—freedom to travel abroad.
The Charter accused the Ministry of Interior and its police of illegal
wire taps, physical surveillance and harassment, house searches, confis-
cation of personal property, mail censorship, use of networks of inform-
ers, and suborning of courts and employers. Investigative and judicial
agencies were said to have repeatedly flouted Czechoslovak law and
the Constitution in conducting politically-motivated trials.
Original signatories of the Charter numbered 244; at present, the
movement claims more than 1,000. The three leading positions, those
of designated spokesmen, have thus far been held by nine persons.
Although this rapid turnover has been attributed to deliberate annual
rotation, regime harassment and intimidation have taken their toll. One
of the original spokesmen (Jan Patocka) died following intense police
interrogation. Four spokesmen have been arrested. Another has been
hospitalized after an assault by police thugs.
Since its establishment, the movement has issued 26 documents.
The contents range from appeals to cease the harassment of Charter
supporters to an analysis of problems of economic consumption and
corruption in Czechoslovakia.
Charter Accomplishments
Despite unremitting harassment and intimidation, the movement
has survived—no mean feat considering the overwhelming power
posed against it. Charter leaders vow to continue their struggle for
human rights, whatever methods the regime uses against them.
Charter activities have focused Western attention on the repressive
character of the Czechoslovak regime and its violations of human

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
rights, as well as its economic problems. The regime’s crackdown on
the signatories has:
—opened a new breach—if only temporarily—between Moscow
and its allies in Eastern Europe on the one hand and West European
Communist parties on the other;
—set back Prague’s attempts to gain wider international acceptabil-
ity and to improve relations with various Western governments; and
—may have caused some embarrassment to Moscow during the
latter’s attempts to pursue detente with the West and, particularly,
the US.
Western reaction may have also contributed to divisions within Czecho-
slovak leadership on how best to deal with dissidence—whether to
moderate harsh policies to blunt Western criticisms or to charge West-
ern governments and media with blatant interference in Czechoslova-
kia’s internal affairs. This is the charge made by Moscow and other
East European regimes in the debate over human rights.
Aware that they could not publicize their goals and documents
within Czechoslovakia, Charter activists have sought to have their
documents published or broadcast in Western media. They have
hoped thus to have them receive maximum publicity both in Czechoslo-
vakia and abroad. The Charter’s success in gaining the support of
Western governments and media has perhaps been its single greatest
accomplishment.
The Charter movement has also enlisted support from other dissi-
dents in Eastern Europe and in the USSR. For instance, in early 1977,
dissidents in Bulgaria, Hungary, Poland, Romania, and the USSR sent
messages of support for the aims and purposes of Charter 77.
Little is known about the contacts which the Chartists have carried
on with other East European dissidents. However, formal contacts were
established with the Polish Committee for Social Self-Defense (KOR).
Meetings were held in August and September 1978, at which it was
announced that efforts would be made to coordinate activities and
establish permanent working groups to further human rights. A third
meeting planned in October 1978 was broken up by coordinated action
of the Czechoslovak and Polish police.
Recently, support from Polish activists has become apparent: a
Krakow student group allegedly plans to stage a hunger strike in
support of the ten arrested Chartists prior to the opening of their trials,
while members of KOR plan to conduct similar strikes in Warsaw
churches. In early July, KOR made public a letter by a group of Polish
Catholics to Czechoslovak Cardinal Tomasek asking him to defend the
ten Chartists, four of them Catholics.
Charter Failures and the Regime’s Tactics
The Charter movement, however, has not been able yet to secure
actual improvements in human rights in Czechoslovakia. In some

Czechoslovakia
respects, the regime is more repressive today than it had been in late
1976. There has been no “constructive dialogue” or role for the Charter
as “mediator in conflict situations.” At no time has the movement
posed a threat to regime stability (although this was not, of course, its
stated intention). The movement has also been troubled by internal
divisions and lack of popular acceptance. Most important of all, how-
ever, has been the regime’s repression of the dissidents.
Although there may be disagreement among Czechoslovak leaders
over how to deal with dissidence, there was never doubt that the
regime would deny the Chartists any role in the political process.
After publication of the Charter 77 manifesto, the regime immediately
resorted to harassment and intimidation; it conducted a massive propa-
ganda campaign denouncing the Charter and its signatories—without
allowing the contents of that manifesto to be published or revealed
at the “spontaneous” meetings of intellectuals, officials, and workers
convened to sign anti-Charter petitions.
After a time, the intensive harassment and propaganda campaign
abated somewhat—perhaps because the regime realized that its tactics
served more to call attention to the Charter and to human rights than to
discredit the movement. Nevertheless, Charter spokesmen and activists
continued to be subjected to heavy surveillance and harassment. Their
drivers licenses have been confiscated; telephones tapped or removed;
and their homes have been searched and materials confiscated. They
have been repeatedly detained and interrogated, denied employment,
and exposed to kidnappings and assaults by police thugs. In addition,
the regime has tried to weaken the movement by forcing or inducing
Charter supporters to emigrate. Informers have been infiltrated into
the movement, not only to keep the authorities informed about Charter
activities, but also to sow dissension within the movement. Among
the most repressive measures taken by the regime are:
—trials and imprisonment of four dissidents in October 1977 for
terms of 14 months to 3½ years on charges of subversion (during the
Belgrade CSCE review conference, while the subject of human rights
was being debated at length).
—the round-up and preventive detention of some 40 activists on
the eve of Brezhnev’s May 1978 visit to Czechoslovakia. Similarly, that
summer—as the 10th anniversary of the invasion neared—the regime
warned various Chartists to leave Prague or face detention.
—the late May 1979 arrests of ten activists of the movement on
charges of subversion. The reasons for these arrests are not known,
but perhaps reflect renewed determination by the police to wipe out
political dissidence before the 1980 CSCE review meeting in Madrid.
Two of the arrested are Charter spokesmen. All ten are activists in the
Committee for the Defense of the Unjustly Prosecuted (VONS), a sub-
group of the Charter, founded in May 1978. VONS has issued more than
100 statements, giving details about the arrests, trials, and sentences

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
of Charter 77 supporters. The trials of the activists were reportedly
planned for July, but apparently have been postponed twice—to give
the public prosecutor more time to prepare his case. The trials are now
said to be scheduled for late October.
—the September 10 police raids carried out in several Czech cities
against Catholic priests and laymen. Between six to twelve Catholic
activists are reported to have been arrested and charged with circulat-
ing samizdat Catholic literature and with impeding state control of
religious activity. There is yet no information that the Catholics are
associated with the Charter movement, but the operation itself com-
prises perhaps the harshest measure against Catholics in some 25 years,
and reflects the determination of the regime to crack down on all
dissidents.
The Czechoslovak samizdat movement, the so-called Padlock Press,
has not been subjected to nearly as much harassment as the Charter
movement. The regime may view the underground literary movement
as much less a threat than the Charter movement.
Popular Acceptance Lacking
The Czechoslovak population has avoided active commitment to
Charter 77. While there is little doubt that the overwhelming majority
of Czechoslovakia’s 15 million inhabitants privately sympathize with
the aims and goals of the Charter movement, few are willing to identify
publicly with it—thereby inviting regime reprisals. The 1968 invasion
apparently reinforced the belief that any political activity not sanc-
tioned by the regime is fruitless.
Even among the 1,000 signatories that are claimed, a solid social
base is lacking. There are only a few workers, peasants, or Slovaks.
The vast majority appear to be intellectuals, with the movement itself
concentrated in Prague.
The professions of some 750 signatories are known: two-thirds
claim to be members of the intelligentsia; the remaining one-third are
registered as workers, artisans, or manual laborers. Even these figures
are misleading, since some manual laborers or workers are in fact
intellectuals forced into menial positions in order to survive. Charter
77 is thus the product of the Prague intelligentsia—with a considerable
number of this intelligentsia comprising communists ousted from the
Party for their opposition to the present regime.
The Slovak Factor
The reasons for the failure of the Charter to obtain Slovak support
may be more complex than mere communications difficulties or geo-
graphic distance from Prague. Traditional Czech-Slovak animosities
evidently play a role: some Slovaks, reportedly reject any association
with the Charter on the grounds that it is a Czech-conceived stratagem
intended to weaken Party leader and President Husak, a Slovak. While

Czechoslovakia
such a reaction is narrow and chauvinistic, the Charter’s establishment
in Prague undoubtedly is a factor in the Slovak reaction to it.
Political dissidence in Slovakia has not been as marked as in the
Czech lands of Bohemia and Moravia—at least, as far as is known.
This may reflect the somewhat more moderate treatment of former
Dubcek reformers and supporters in Slovakia. Children of Slovaks
purged from the Party since the invasion, for instance, appear to have
more opportunities to higher education than those elsewhere, particu-
larly in Prague. Given their minority status in Czechoslovakia, the
Slovaks may also feel the need to band together against the Czechs
and, therefore, Slovak officials may be less inclined to take harsh actions
toward their bretheren. The purges which followed the 1968 invasion
and the fall of Dubcek in April 1969 appear to have been less severe
in Slovakia than in the Czech lands.
The Slovaks may also feel that their political and economic status
within Czechoslovakia has improved since 1968, when federalization
was enacted—the only surviving major feature of the Dubcek reform
period. Accordingly, they would seem to have less reason to oppose
a regime headed by a Slovak. On the other hand, many Czechs are
known to resent bitterly the present federal structure, which they feel
has the minority Slovaks in dominant Party-Government positions.
Other Shortcomings
Some non-communists reportedly question the motives of various
leading activists in the movement. Particularly the ex-communists are
distrusted and viewed as using the Charter movement as a vehicle
from which to attack those communists in power. The ex-communists
are criticized as opportunistic and insincere, since they now espouse
the civil and human rights which they had ignored while holding
Party positions.
Although some factionalism evidently existed within the Charter
movement in its early stages (e.g., between ex-communists and anti-
communists, Catholics and atheists), the divisions deepened as the
membership grew and became more diverse. The first three spokes-
men—philosopher-professor Jan Patocka, playwright Vaclav Havel,
and former Foreign Minister Jiri Hajek—were well known in Czecho-
slovakia and abroad, and commanded respect and authority. (Neither
Patocka nor Havel was communist; both in fact had been persecuted
by the regime. Hajek, a professor, served as Foreign Minister under
Dubcek; he was among the first of the reformers to be purged after
the invasion.)
Factionalism became more of a problem for leaders of the Charter
after Patocka’s death in March 1977. Younger members were said to
favor more aggressive, confrontational tactics, while Hajek and others

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
counselled that the movement should remain within the “strict confines
of legality.” Disillusionment with increasing factionalism may have
been a main factor in Hajek’s decision to resign as spokesman—
although the view that the position should rotate annually was
obviously a factor. Those spokesmen who later came to represent the
movement have not been able to use their influence to resolve differ-
ences—in part, because of their lesser prominence at home and abroad.
While acknowledging divisions, some Chartists dismiss them as of little
consequence, underscoring instead the common goal of the struggle
for human rights.
Organizers of the Charter clearly recognized that concentrating the
movement in the capital city of Prague would be a disadvantage, but
they had little choice. They sought to avoid police attention by limiting
their contacts outside Prague; some who played a prominent role in
the establishment of Charter 77 had been under police surveillance
and any travel outside the city would have been duly scrutinized.
Moreover, such travel would have given the impression that a “conspir-
acy” was underway or that attempts were being made to found an
“organization,” for which Ministry of Interior approval is necessary
and would never have been granted.
Prospects
Prospects that the movement will accomplish its goals remain as
bleak as ever, since:
—The regime has all the necessary levers of power and coercion
at its disposal, and will not hesitate to use them if threatened. It also
sees no reason to consider any “dialogue” with the Chartists, since this
could open a Pandora’s box. Prague takes its cue from Moscow, where
the attitude toward human rights dissidents is also one of hostility and
repression. As a result, Prague can feel confident it has Soviet support
for its policies against dissent.2
—The failures that have plagued the Charter movement from the
outset (above all, the lack of popular support) have not been reversed,
with little prospect for improvement in the foreseeable future. The
movement is likely to remain concentrated in Prague, with the intelli-
gentsia its hard core and driving force.
Despite these bleak prospects, the movement deserves respect,
admiration, and sympathy for its ability to survive thus far and for its
willingness to confront the regime in the face of overwhelming odds.
2 Prague would hardly have conducted the October 1977 trials of the four dissidents
without Moscow’s approval—coming as they did at a most sensitive time during the
CSCE review conference. Similarly, it is unlikely that Prague would try those Chartists
now under arrest without informing Moscow beforehand and gaining its understanding
and approval. [Footnote is in the original.]

Czechoslovakia
111.
Memorandum From Stephen Larrabee of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, October 22, 1979
SUBJECT
Trial of Czech Dissidents (U)
The trial of six of the ten Czech dissidents began today. Only family
members of the defendants were allowed inside the courtroom. (C)
The beginning of the trial raises the question of how we should
respond. You indicated on my Evening Report of October 16th2 that
you felt our Ambassador, Frank Meehan, should be called back for
consultations. In principle, I agree; but I suggest that we wait until the
end of the trial to see how it is conducted and what the sentences are
before recalling Meehan. State concurs. (C)
There are two reasons for this:
—Our reaction will in part depend on the severity of the sentences;
—There may be other trials (either of the remaining Chapter 77
members or of the priests arrested several weeks ago. (C)
In the meantime, I would recommend that we do the following
in response:
—Postpone the scheduled visit by Deputy Assistant Secretary Barry
—Publically condemn the trials as a violation of the Helsinki
Final Act;4
—Postpone the tabling of the Czech gold claims proposal and let
the Czechs know privately the reasons for our decision.5 (C)
2 In an Evening Report dated October 16, Larrabee informed Brzezinski that rumors
were circulating in Prague that the dissidents would be put on trial October 22. Brzezinski
marked the paragraph and wrote “Our Ambassador should come home for consultations”
in the margin. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Staff Eve-
3 Brzezinski wrote “Yes” in the margin next to this paragraph. The Department
informed the Embassy in Prague of the decision in telegram 277453, October 24. (National
4 Brzezinski wrote “Yes” in the margin of this paragraph
5 Brzezinski placed a question mark in the margin next to this paragraph

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
Again, we may wish to recall Meehan, but I recommend that we
wait and see how the trial develops before taking any precipitous
RECOMMENDATION: That the decision whether to recall Meehan
be taken at the end of the trial.6
6 Brzezinski did not approve or disapprove the action but wrote in the margin
“Wouldn’t we be better off if he came home now—and then returned? I am not sure
about the gold at this time.”
112.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to
NATO and the Embassy in Czechoslovakia1
279993. Subject: (U) Dissident Trial—US Response. Ref: A) State
1. (C-entire text).
2. The following are the steps which we are taking in response to
the outcome of the trial of the six dissidents in Prague.3 We believe
these steps will impress the Czechoslovak Government with the seri-
ousness of our concern.
Confidential; Immediate. Also sent for information to Belgrade. Drafted and approved
by Barry; cleared by Larrabee, Gilmore (EUR/EE), and Gharrison (EUR/RPM).
made by Department Press Spokesman Hodding Carter at the October 24 press briefing
regarding the trials of Czechoslovak dissidents. (National Archives, RG 59, Central
Embassy recommended that the Department be prepared to take a position once the
sentences were handed down. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
ants were found guilty and sentenced to time in prison ranging between 2 and 5 years.
The Embassy also reported that the sentences for Uhl, Havel, and Benda were lighter
than requested by the prosecutor and an appeal by the prosecution was not excluded.
from Prague, October 24, the Embassy described the trial as “a new low in Czechoslovak
jurisprudence” and that the defense lawyers had been timid and ineffective. (National

Czechoslovakia
A. Return of Ambassador Meehan for consultations. We are asking
Ambassador Meehan to return to Washington at his early convenience
for about one week of consultations to discuss US-Czechoslovak
relations in light of the trial.4
B. Press statement. The Department spokesman issued a strong
statement condemning the trials and the unreasonably harsh sentences
on October 24.5
C. Protest to Czechoslovak authorities. DAS Barry called in Czecho-
slovak Ambassador Johanes on October 25 to express strongly held US
views about the trial.6 Ambassador Meehan was instructed to follow
up in Prague.
have decided that it would be useful to consult with you on where we go in our relations
with Czechoslovakia in the wake of the dissident trial” and that, after delivering a
démarche on the trial to Czechoslovak authorities, Meehan should return to Washington.
from Prague, October 29, the Embassy reported that the Ambassador briefly discussed
the trials with Jablonsky on October 26 at the Austrian National Day reception and set
up an appointment at the Foreign Ministry for October 30. (National Archives, RG 59,
Department publicized that Meehan had been recalled for consultations. (Telegram
D790496–0986) The next day, the Foreign Ministry canceled Meehan’s meeting with
Jablonsky and Meehan left Prague without making an official démarche. Embassy Chargé
Morton was called to the Foreign Ministry on October 30, where Sixth Department
Director Jancik stressed that cancelation of the Meehan-Jablonsky meeting was due to
USG statements on dissident trials. Reporting on the conversation in telegram 3860 from
Prague, November 1, Morton suggested that, based on the tone rather than content
of the presentation as well as reports from other Western Embassies in Prague, the
Czechoslovak “MFA is clearly unhappy about effects of trial.” Morton also noted that
while other Western diplomatic representatives “were out in less than 15 minutes,”
following their meeting at the Foreign Ministry, “drafters of protest to US obviously
emptied their files in searching for grievances to repeat.” (National Archives, RG 59,
Central Foreign Policy File, D790500–0586)
The statement condemned the trials and the sentences given the dissidents and stressed
that the Department would continue to speak out against violations of human rights
“wherever they occur.” The statement concluded: “The human rights of Czechs and
Slovaks and their freedom to exercise these rights have obviously been a matter of
interest to some of Czechoslovakia’s neighbors who have had more than a little influence
over the ‘internal affairs’ of that country, in particular during the past eleven years.”
6 Barry called Ambassador Johanes on October 26 to deliver the U.S. protest on the
dissident trials. The Department reported the conversation in telegram 279131 to Prague,
October 26. Barry told Johanes that the harsh sentences given the dissidents would affect
the consultations the Department was having with Congress on a new claims/gold
earlier Barry had cautioned Ambassador Johanes that Czechoslovak human rights behav-
ior would affect the attitude in Congress toward any new proposal made by the Depart-
ment on the claims/gold issue. (Telegram 274486 to Prague, October 19; National

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
D. Visits. We cancelled the visit to Prague of DAS Barry scheduled
for November 5 and 6 and informed the Czechoslovak Government in
Washington and Prague that the cancellation was a result of the trials.
3. For USNATO. Please advise the NAC of the steps we have taken
and report steps taken by others.7
Christopher
from other Western countries to the dissident trials in Czechoslovakia, noting that while
some meetings were to go on as planned, several Western governments had canceled
or postponed travel to Prague. The Embassy reported that visits were “hostage to likely
reaction pending trial of four more dissidents. Consensus of NATO Chiefs of Mission
is that regime has decided internal considerations heavily outweigh foreign policy.”
113.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
Czechoslovakia1
State 240364.2
1. (C-entire text)
2. Despite the generally inauspicious circumstances prevailing
now, the Department is considering the desirability of moving on the
Czechoslovak claims/gold question in the near future. We are contem-
plating tabling by next month in Prague the claims/gold proposal
which has been under consideration with the following revisions:
Confidential; Priority; Exdis. Drafted by Johnson; cleared in draft by Crook and by
Schmidt and Larrabee; approved by Barry.
to Prague, September 12, 1979, reported the U.K. Government position that Senator
Long’s proposal of vesting and selling the Czechoslovak gold was illegal. The Department
also reported that the United Kingdom had become impatient with the length of time
the United States was taking to resolve the claim issue and was interested in proceeding
with its own settlement. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,

Czechoslovakia
—A 100 [percent] cash settlement of the remaining principal value
of the claims ($66.5 million);
—Simultaneous delivery of the gold (now worth $420 million)
—Full cash settlement of the surplus property debt ($8 million).
(If a concession became necessary during the course of the negotiations
to obtain a high settlement for private claimants, we would be willing
to consider accepting some or all of this government debt in crowns.)
3. In the changed conditions of 1980, raising the ante to this level
may not be unreasonable. We believe there is at least a slight chance
the GOC would agree to negotiate on such a proposal. We considered
Deputy Foreign Minister Jablonsky’s reaction to the Ambassador’s sug-
gestion (ref A)3 a positive sign in this direction. A further indication
of possible GOC flexibility was reported by Paul Lyet of Sperry Rand.
Lyet said that at a February 12 dinner with Ambassador Johanes and
other Embassy officers, Johanes informed Lyet that several American
lawyers had asked him why Czechoslovakia refused to settle the claims.
Johanes said that he told them responsibility for making a proposal
lay with the State Department. He asked Lyet rhetorically what the
American claims were—$75 million? Then, with appropriately expan-
sive gestures, he said, “we’ll settle for 100 cents on the dollar.” Even
in the much more likely event they refuse, we would have at least
attempted to carry out our responsibilities to the claimants and our
mandate from Congress.
4. We believe the following factors argue for going ahead now:
—(1) The astronomical price of gold has unquestionably improved
our bargaining position. Proposing a 100 [percent] cash settlement of
the claims and having some reasonable expectation of achieving it is
no longer unrealistic;
rency should be very appealing to the GOC with its troubled economy
and the imminent prospect of increased hard currency energy
expenditures;
3 Ambassador Meehan met with Jablonsky on January 30 to discuss the state of
U.S.-Czechoslovak relations. The Department cabled the Embassy with some informal
suggestions as to how the Ambassador might probe Czechoslovak willingness to settle
the claims/gold matter in light of the growing value of the Czechoslovak gold. (Telegram
Prague, January 31. Jablonsky, Meehan reported, did not immediately reject the sugges-
tion that Czechoslovakia might need to pay $64 million representing the full amount of
claims, but rather he asked if MFN would be part of that package. (National Archives,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
—(3) The half billion dollar gold prize is again sparking interest
in the U.S. in vesting—for example, the Merrigan investment initia-
tive—and we can reasonably expect this pressure to grow;
—(4) The British are continuing to press for our agreement to the
delivery of the gold so that they can get on with their own claims
settlement. Unless we are able to demonstrate some movement in the
near future, they may seriously propose that the Commission order
the delivery of the gold held by the Bank of England to enable HMG
to bring into effect the 1964 UK-Czechoslovak agreed minute (ref B).
—(5) Although we have legitimate reasons for failing to make a new
proposal after Congress repudiated the 1974 Agreement, our position
is vulnerable to attack from the interested parties. The claimants say
we have done nothing to advance their interests since 1974, and that
inflation has seriously eroded the value of any settlement. Congress
can point to the clear mandate it gave in 1974 to renegotiate the 40
agreement. And the Czechoslovaks can say that they have demon-
strated their intention to fulfill their legal obligation to the owners of
the nationalized property by twice agreeing to pay compensation. They
can also point to our failure to return to the bargaining table despite
our unilateral repudiation of both ad referendum agreements;
—(6) It would be more difficult to prevent Congress from mandat-
ing the vesting of the gold than it was to defeat the 1976 lawsuit. If
vesting legislation were enacted, we would have considerable difficul-
ties with the French and British Governments, and our relations with
Czechoslovakia would be poisoned for years to come; and
—(7) Assuming that the GOC did not reject the proposal out of
hand, we would be able to point to continuing negotiations to deflect
congressional proposals to vest the gold, as well as “separate peace”
proposals from the British.
5. We see the following objections to proceeding as recommended
above, but we do not believe any of them to be overriding:
—(1) The chances of achieving a 100 [percent] cash settlement in
the very near future are admittedly not great. Only Yugoslavia, among
the Eastern European countries, paid anything approaching this
amount. (It is interesting to note, however, that the primary reason for
the high percentage of the Yugoslav settlement, which was reached in
1948, was the fact that we held Yugoslav monetary gold valued in
excess of our claims against the GOY);
—(2) Reopening the negotiations with the Czechoslovaks at this
time could be seen as a signal that we intend to proceed with “business
as usual”, despite Czechoslovak support for the Soviet invasion of
Afghanistan and continued repression of dissidents;
—(3) Tabling this proposal could raise unrealistic expectations
among the claimants. If these expectations are not fulfilled, they could

Czechoslovakia
lead to increased pressures for Congress to vest the gold with the
consequent adverse legal and political results; and
—(4) The Czechoslovaks could regard the proposal as insulting,
and our already bad bilateral relations would become even worse.
6. Despite the problems and objections, we believe it prudent and
desirable to move ahead at this time. If we are to do so, however,
we need to get cracking now. We would appreciate the Embassy’s
comments/counter proposals on the foregoing.4
Christopher
fully with the Department’s assessment of the situation and proposed next moves.
114.
Action Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State
for European Affairs (Vest) to the Under Secretary of State
for Political Affairs (Newsom)1
Washington, April 30, 1980
SUBJECT
Circular 175 Authority: Claims/Gold Agreement with Czechoslovakia
ISSUE FOR DECISION
Whether to authorize our Ambassador in Prague to negotiate and
conclude an agreement with Czechoslovakia settling nationalization
claims and other financial issues.
ESSENTIAL FACTORS
Despite the more than 30 years which have passed since World
War II ended and the Communists seized power in Prague, unresolved
financial disputes from that era continue to bedevil our relations with
and Barry and in E, H, EB, L/EUR, and Treasury. Barry initialed the memorandum for
Vest. According to a stamped notation, Newsom saw the memorandum on May 5.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
Czechoslovakia. We have not been able to conclude a satisfactory agree-
ment on compensation for the claims of American citizens and corpora-
tions whose property was nationalized during the early post-war
period or on several other related financial issues. The Foreign Claims
Settlement Commission has adjudicated the value of the claims in 1958
we have refused to consent to the delivery to Czechoslovakia of the
remaining portion (18.4 metric tons) of its share of the Nazi-looted
monetary gold which the Allies recovered at the close of the war. We
have also maintained blocking controls on approximately $1.4 million
of Czechoslovak assets in the United States and have refused to consider
granting MFN status to Czechoslovakia.
The Gold
We are a member of the Tripartite (U.S., U.K., France) Commission
for the Restitution of Monetary Gold, established by multilateral agree-
ment in 1946 to marshall all monetary gold found in Germany and to
allocate it among the countries whose gold was looted by the Nazis.
Unanimity is required for the Commission to effect delivery of the
remainder of the share it allocated to Czechoslovakia in 1947 and we
have so far not consented to such action. The French would like to see
the gold delivered, having settled their claims in 1950. The British
are even more interested since under a 1964 UK-Czechoslovak agreed
minute, settlement of British claims will begin only after the gold is
delivered. The British have, in fact, been pressing us rather actively
during the past year to get on with a settlement.
Past Claims/Gold Negotiations
Serious discussions with the Czechoslovaks on these issues have
taken place intermittently since 1949 and twice we have reached ad
referendum agreements. In both cases, however, Congress objected to
the claims settlement as too low. Most recently, a 1974 settlement for
$29 million or approximately 40 cents on the dollar (typical of our
settlements with other Eastern European countries) was repudiated by
section 408 of the 1974 Trade Act added at the insistence of Senators
Long and Gravel. The Trade Act also requires that any future agreement
be approved by Congress. Our efforts to resume negotiations since
that time have regularly been thwarted by a souring of the political
atmosphere caused by repressive measures of the Czechoslovak Gov-
ernment against its dissident citizens. We had obtained interagency
agreement last fall to propose a claims settlement of $51 million (70
percent of the adjudicated principal with no interest).2 We did not go
2 See Document 109.

Czechoslovakia
forward with the proposal at that time because of the trial of six dissi-
dents in Prague in October.
With the rise in the price of gold to its present level (at $500
per ounce the Czechoslovak gold is worth about $300 million), our
negotiating leverage has increased substantially as has the pressure on
us from the claimants for a good and rapid settlement. It now should
be within the realm of possibility to obtain a claims settlement which
will be acceptable to the claimants and to Congress and to reach a
satisfactory resolution of the other issues involving USG financial inter-
ests. Such an outcome would move our bilateral relations with Czecho-
slovakia out of their long stagnation and increase our policy options
in dealing with that country.
Our Proposal
We intend to propose to the Czechoslovak Government that we
renegotiate the provisions of the 1974 ad referendum agreement relating
to the amount to be paid by Czechoslovakia in settlement of U.S. claims
and that we leave the other provisions as agreed in 1974. We would
initially propose that the Czechoslovak Government make a lump sum
pal and interest awarded by the Foreign Claims Settlement Commis-
sion). The central elements of the proposal are described in the
attachment at Tab 2.3
Our initial proposal of $105 million will be much higher than
our opening position in the negotiations which led to the failed 1974
agreement ($26 million), although commensurate with the increase in
the value of the Czechoslovak gold. It also exceeds the settlement levels
with other Eastern European countries. There are several reasons for
a high opening position. Initially, it seems clear that Congress will not
approve a settlement which is not much more favorable to American
claimants than the failed 1974 agreement, particularly in light of the
greatly increased value of the gold. Our proposal will give us negotia-
ting room to reach an eventual settlement acceptable to Congress.
Moreover, this proposal responds to Congressional suggestions that
we should seek interest on the value of U.S. citizens’ claims.4
3 Tab 2 is attached but not printed.
4 The Department of the Treasury suggested using the demand for interest as a
means to improve the U.S. negotiating position and ensure that Congress would have
its concerns about interest addressed when the agreement went to the Hill for approval.
The Treasury position was reported in telegram 72571 to Prague, March 19. (National
Prague, March 24, Ambassador Meehan responded that such a position “verges on the
unreal” and “could throw the previous basis of negotiation out the window.” “We
think” Meehan wrote, Czechoslovakia “would receive the 105 million figure as a naively
exaggerated bargaining tactic or else as a signal we are not serious about negotiating.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
Because of the level of our proposal, there is a risk that the Czecho-
slovaks will not be willing to enter into meaningful negotiations; how-
ever, we believe that the substantial increase in the value of the gold
provides an incentive for the Czechoslovak Government to consider
our proposal seriously and to make a reasonable response. Moreover,
the Czechoslovaks will expect us to present an initial position that will
allow some bargaining room.
If the Czechoslovaks do reject our proposal to resume negotiations,
we will have in any event sought to satisfy the mandate of section 408 of
the Trade Act to renegotiate the 1974 Czechoslovak Claims Settlement
Agreement. However, such an outcome could also result in increased
pressure from the claimants and from Members of Congress for the
U.S. Government to vest the gold to satisfy U.S. claims.
Congressional and Public Consultations
We consulted extensively last fall with interested Members of Con-
gress on the terms of a settlement. With the important exception of
Senator Long, all of the Members consulted indicated they would be
willing to support a settlement in the range of 50%. Since our present
proposal meets even Senator Long’s expressed requirement for “100
cents on the dollar,” we believe that he will not block a settlement at
or near this figure. Similarly, we have discussed the terms of a possible
settlement with a number of the claimants or their representatives.
They would be delighted to receive anything close to 100% of the
principal value of their claims. The claimants, many of whom are
elderly, are anxious for a settlement, and many are disgruntled with
our failure to obtain one since 1974. Individuals who were active in
obtaining Congressional disapproval of the 1974 agreement are now
lobbying for legislation to use the gold to compensate the claimants
directly and we understand some Members of Congress are prepared
to introduce such legislation.5 Taking such a step without the agreement
which directed the Secretary of the Treasury to “take full possession of all Czechoslovak
gold located in the United States, if a settlement agreement is not submitted to Congress
or such agreement has not been approved by Congress, within 60 days of enactment of
this act.” The proceeds of the sale would be invested in U.S. and foreign securities, and
all interest accrued from the investment deposited into the Czechoslovak Claims Fund
for payment of claims. The bill also directed the Secretary of State to negotiate with the
United Kingdom and France on the vesting of Czechoslovak gold in the United Kingdom,
to be used in conjunction with the vested gold in the United States for payments to
claimants. The bill was referred to the House Committee on Foreign Affairs. A joint
hearing was held by the Subcommittee on International Economic Policy and the Subcom-
mittee on Europe and the Middle East on August 19. In telegram 229046 to Prague,
August 28, the Department reported: “most of the subcommittee members present were
clearly sympathetic to the concerns of the claimants” and that “the administration’s
presentation regarding the desirability of a negotiated settlement and the legal and
political problems which the bill presented did not appear to have had much effect.”

Czechoslovakia
of the UK and France—who have told us unambiguously they would
oppose it—would clearly violate specific U.S. international legal
commitments.
If we can establish with the Czechoslovak Government that a basis
exists for fruitful negotiations, we will conduct more comprehensive
consultations with a broader range of the claimants. Immediately prior
to tabling our new proposal, we will advise Senator Long and several
other Members of Congress with particular interests in this issue of
our plans. We will also consult with them periodically during the
course of the negotiations. Such consultations will be critical, since the
approval of Congress would be required under the terms of Section
408 of the Trade Act of 1974 in order for the agreement to enter into
effect, and related legislation would be required to authorize the
Foreign Claims Settlement Commission to adjudicate claims arising
RECOMMENDATION
That you authorize our Ambassador in Prague to negotiate and
conclude a claims agreement with Czechoslovakia as described above,
subject to concurrence by EUR, L, EB, H and other appropriate bureaus
and agencies.7
6 Tab 1 is attached but not printed.
7 Newsom approved the recommendation on May 6.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
115.
Memorandum From Stephen Larrabee of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Assistant
for National Security Affairs (Aaron)1
Washington, July 21, 1980
SUBJECT
Revised Claims/Gold Proposal for Czechoslovakia
I. Background
State had planned to table a proposal for a settlement of the Claims/
Gold issue in October 1979, but its efforts were suspended at that time
due to the trial of 6 Czech dissidents. In May of this year State proposed
renewing its efforts to settle the issue with a revised proposal which
included:
—A 100 percent cash settlement of the remaining principal value
of the claims ($66.5 million);
—Simultaneous delivery of the gold (now worth $420 million);
—Full cash settlement of the surplus property debt ($8 million). (C)
At that time I sent a memo to Zbig informing him of State’s inten-
tion, which was forwarded to Madeleine for comment. (Tab A)2 After
Madeleine looked into the Congressional situation, she recommended
going forward, and Zbig approved the recommendation. (Tab B)3 (C)
II. Rationale
The main reason for moving forward now—even in an election year—is
that a bill (HR 7338) was introduced into the House by Congressman Wolff
on May 13 to vest the gold—despite efforts by State to head it off. The
essence of the Wolff bill is that the Secretary of the Treasury would be
instructed to sell any of the gold allocated to Czechoslovakia which is
in the custody of the United States, invest the proceeds in interest-
bearing securities, pay the American claimants from the interest, and
return the principal to Czechoslovakia after the claims are settled. (C)
Such action would be contrary to the Tripartite Agreement signed
with the British and French in 1946 which stated that the gold would
to Brzezinski with a handwritten note: “ZB—Note see p. 2.”
2 Tab A, a May 19 memorandum from Larrabee to Brzezinski is attached but not
printed. The memorandum was forwarded to Madeleine Albright on May 20 by
David Aaron.
3 Tab B, a May 22 memorandum from Albright to Brzezinski and Aaron, is attached
but not printed.

Czechoslovakia
be returned to Czechoslovakia upon agreement between the three part-
ners. Moreover, under the Wolff Bill the claimants would have to wait
14–25 years to get their money, whereas under State’s proposal, once
the issue had been settled, they could get their money immediately. (C)
III. Domestic Implications
State’s decision to move forward was taken after close consultation with
Congress and the Czechoslovak-American community. Among those in Con-
gress concerned with the issue, there was considerable sentiment that
State should finally get the issue settled. The Czechoslovak-American
community, particularly the Czechoslovak National Congress, also
supported an equitable settlement of the issue because many of the
claimants were getting old and were about to die. (C)
In short, while an election year is obviously not the most propitious
time to table a proposal, our hand was forced by Wolff.4 However,
unlike the return of the Crown of St. Stephen to Hungary, in State’s
view, this is not an issue which is likely to stir up a hornet’s nest
domestically.5 (C)
Our proposal envisages a settlement of about 160 percent of the
original principal, thus allowing us to show firmness to any domestic
critics. (It should be noted in this regard that claims settlements with
China and other East European countries were considerably less:
over, our present proposal with Czechoslovakia is considerably better
than the 1974 proposal, which envisaged a 41% settlement.) (C)
No thought is being given to improving relations with Prague (though
a settlement would clear the decks for such an improvement if and
when it became politically desirable). Lastly, any settlement is far down
the road. The Czechs have reacted negatively to our proposal because
it is high and so out of line with other settlements, and they are not
likely to agree even to begin negotiations for some time. (C)
5 Aaron highlighted this passage with an arrow in the margin. He wrote at the
bottom of the memorandum: “ZB—Question is: Will Wolff bill pass this year? If not,
why press it now? I think we should slow this down. DA.” Brzezinski responded: “DA.
Slow it down. I tend to feel the same way. ZB.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
116.
Telegram From the Embassy in Czechoslovakia to the
Department of State1
4344.
USCINCEUR,
CINCUSAFE,
and
CINCUSAREUR
for
POLADs. Subject: Czechoslovakia at the End of 1980—An Overview.
1. (C-entire text.)
2. This is a background report which may be useful in briefing the
transition team. For more extensive discussion of certain areas we
recommend reference to Prague A–4, “Czechoslovakia Isn’t Working,”
and Prague A–16, “Czechoslovak Looks Inward.”
3. The outstanding impression of Czechoslovakia today as it has
been for a decade, is of an apathetic, disengaged population ruled by
a nervous, unselfconfident regime. The regime, imposed by Soviet
pressure in 1969, has never been able to convince the people, the outside
world or, seemingly, itself of its legitimacy. The trauma caused by the
crushing of the Prague Spring of 1968 has kept the regime fearful of
innovation and unwilling to take any step that might cause Moscow
to raise an ideological eyebrow. This attitude has contributed heavily
to the stagnation which now afflicts the economy.
4. After the brief orgy of liberalization in 1968 the people have
retreated into mass apathy, appearing to concern themselves entirely
with consumer spending, recreation, and work avoidance. Politics,
including the small manifestations of intellectual dissidence, leaves the
masses cold and Party membership is seen by most simply as a means of
advancing careers. The regime, fearing outbursts of popular resistance
a la Poland, has been reluctant to raise the currently subsidized prices
to world levels and has so far kept action on improving work discipline
to exhortation. It has since the Polish disturbances chosen to give in
to workers’ demands in unpublicized local labor disputes rather than
risk confrontation.
5. The Czechoslovak economy is sick. The strong industrial plant
with which Czechoslovakia emerged from World War II is now by
any standards obsolete and energy inefficient. Dependent almost
entirely on imports for raw materials and energy, it has had to adjust
to sharp rises in prices, even for goods supplied by the USSR, supplier
of almost all of Czechoslovakia’s oil and much of its other raw materials.
At the same time its industrial products have become steadily less
Confidential; Priority. Sent for information to Belgrade, East Berlin, Bucharest, Budapest,
Moscow, Sofia, Warsaw, and USCINCEUR, CINCUSAFE, and CINCUSAREUR.

Czechoslovakia
competitive in both world and CEMA markets. The above-noted fear
of policy innovation, unmotivated work force, and obsolete plant create
almost unsuperable problems for economic policymakers, made no
easier by traditional GOC reluctance to borrow heavily abroad. Prob-
lems are such that as of this date neither the 1981 economic plan nor
the 1981–85 five-year plan has yet been completed. A set of measures
to invigorate management of industry within the scope of a central
plan is to be put into effect in January 1981, but no observer expects
any revolutionary improvement to result. On the agricultural side, it
has had to turn to the West for feed grains in fairly sizable amounts
and must scrabble to fulfill demand for meat.
6. Czechoslovak trade, which accounts for over 30 percent of
national income, is being sucked increasingly into the mire of the
Comecon economies. The causes are Czechoslovak dependence on
Soviet energy sources. Competitive inability to earn sufficient hard
currency to diversify sources, and increasing Soviet success in promot-
ing economic integration. Fifty percent of Czechoslovakia’s exports
of machinery and equipment (traditional hard currency earners) are
already going to the Soviet Union and an additional 30 percent to other
Comecon countries. This trend is not contrary to the wishes of many
Czechoslovak planners, who would rather see their country as an equal
partner in a second-rate economic grouping than a second-rate country
in world markets. The consequence is a decline in Czechoslovak oppor-
tunity for economic maneuver, just as the country has already lost its
opportunity for political maneuver in the international arena.
7. The economic slowdown of the past two years has been accompa-
nied by stiffened internal political controls. The current leadership is
intensely aware of the potential social impacts of economic decline and
its self-imposed policy limitations. It is putting the people, especially
real or potential dissidents, on notice that it is prepared to ensure its
survival over the difficult times ahead.
8. In foreign policy Czechoslovakia continues to be the most fervent
supporter of Soviet policies and frequent mouthpiece for Soviet views,
as it has been at the Madrid CSCE review. It pursues an activist policy,
marked by many exchanges of visits, acts as a Soviet surrogate in
certain Third World areas, and has some foreign aid responsibilities,
most notably in Indo-China and Afghanistan.
9. Our bilateral relations with Czechoslovakia remain basically
deadlocked pending resolution of the longstanding claims/gold issue.
Our refusal to grant Czechoslovakia MFN rankles. Scientific exchanges
continue but cultural exchanges are down to a trickle; across the board,
lack of an exchange agreement leaves us with no means of enforcing
reciprocity. Arranging normal contacts with officials remains extremely
difficult. Heavy-handed anti-American propaganda fills the media

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
almost constantly, poisoning the atmosphere. Seemingly pointless har-
assment, bureaucratic delay, and general obstruction of American tour-
ists by Czechoslovak authorities led the Embassy in July of this year
to request the Department to issue an advisory warning travelers of
possible difficulties. On the positive side, however, the Czechoslovaks
have worked steadily to resolve divided family cases, reducing the
Embassy’s list of immediate (nuclear) families awaiting reunification
in the West to two cases involving three individuals.
10. While the Czechoslovak side must bear the brunt of the blame
for the propaganda atmosphere, the US side is not blameless. Czecho-
slovak officials perceive statements by US officials as part of a discrimi-
natory policy, which makes a scapegoat of this country to further US
policy goals with other countries whose human rights practices seem
no less worthy of criticism. Quite clearly at the Belgrade CSCE Review
Czechoslovakia served as a surrogate for the Soviet Union in receiving
criticism from US delegates. With some justice GOC officials point out
that positive factors, such as family reunification progress, tend to
be ignored.
11. The outlook for bilateral relations is not bright. We are attempt-
ing to negotiate a claims/gold settlement before pending legislation
requires us to seize the gold we hold and invest it to pay the claims,
but can have no great assurance of success.2 Should that issue be
resolved, some modest progress would be possible: The dormant Con-
sular Convention would take effect, an exchanges agreement might be
signed, permitting a modest increase in our information programs. As
long as the Jackson-Vanik provisions of the Trade Act remain law, we
foresee no early possibility of giving Czechoslovakia MFN and, failing
that, no likely surge in agricultural trade. Our interests in Czechoslova-
kia are simply too few to provide an impetus for much improvement
in bilateral relations.
12. The outlook is not, however, completely dark. In spite of 35
years of Soviet hegemony and an ever-increasing integration of the
economy into the Soviet sphere, the Czechoslovak people remain West-
ern oriented. The ties of emigration remain strong, with hundreds of
thousands of Americans claiming Czech and Slovak ancestry. VOA
and other Western radios, plus Austrian and West German TV, have
large, regular audiences and any Western cultural attraction has a real
sell out. In fact, this is a basic problem the regime faces—35 years of
2 The agreement on Czechoslovak payment of claims for expropriated U.S. citizens
was initialed on November 6, 1981, in Prague Congress passed a resolution approving
the deal on December 15 and President Reagan signed it on December 29. As part of
the deal, the Czechoslovak Government agreed to pay $81.5 million to the claimants.

Czechoslovakia
unremitting Communist propaganda have failed to change the Western
orientation and basic values of the people.
13. Maintaining this Western orientation has over the years been
our major policy thrust in Czechoslovakia. We have never been able
to get any of post postwar regimes to exert independence of Moscow,
but neither has Moscow ever been able to develop confidence in the
loyalty of the Czechoslovak people to Soviet aims. Without such confi-
dence the Kremlin cannot count on Czechoslovakia as a strong left
flank for Warsaw Pact forces facing NATO forces in West Germany.
We assume that future policies toward Czechoslovakia will be basically
designed to deny it that confidence.
Morton

German Democratic Republic
117.
Telegram From the Embassy in the German Democratic
Republic to the Department of State1
6051. Subj: US/GDR Relations: GDR Proposals for Major Expan-
sion. Ref: Berlin 60502 (Notal).
Summary: During May 12 meeting with Charge, Foreign Minister
Fischer expressed GDR readiness to expand US–GDR relations noting
that CSCE Final Act provided solid basis for such expansion. GDR
favored high-level periodic political consultations, increased trade, and
cultural contacts. He asserted all humanitarian cases had been resolved,
and urged “reciprocity” in granting of visas for journalists. Charge
noted that “non-paper” aide memoire3 which Fischer handed over
would be carefully studied and responded to as appropriate. We
favored development of constructive relationships wherever possible.
We were pleased by progress in humanitarian cases, although our
records show that not all cases have been resolved, and hoped we
could see progress also in emergency family reunification matters. On
Consular Convention, our view was that we were waiting for response
from GDR side, and we would also like to have some response from
them to our suggestion for talks on claims negotiations. Fischer took
issue with our view on status of Consular Convention negotiations,
but said he would ask his Consular as well as claims people to be in
touch with Embassy. He was opposed to double accreditation to US
FRG-based journalists to GDR. End summary.
1. In meeting May 12 with Charge, GDR Foreign Minister began
presentation by stating that there was a need to accelerate development
of relations between the US and GDR. He noted that CSCE provided
a solid basis for an expansion of contacts and that US and GDR had
been in contact on some non-CSCE related issues. He asserted the GDR
had made a variety of proposals to US, adding that the state of relations
Confidential; Priority. Sent for information to Belgrade, Bonn, Bucharest, Budapest,
London, Moscow, Paris, Prague, Sofia, Warsaw, West Berlin, and USNATO.
logistical and bureaucratic matters. The reference is likely to telegram 6040 from East
Berlin, May 12, which also reported on the meeting with Foreign Minister Fischer.

German Democratic Republic
at the present time was really not consistent with what seemed to be
possible. He said a regular exchange of views at different levels would
enable both sides to resolve problems and at the same time to draw
“a balance” in relations. It was their desire to do whatever was possible
to give “a constructive impulse” to the expansion of US–GDR relations.
2. Turning to the aide memoire, which he described as a “non-
paper”, Fischer read selectively from it. The GDR was proposing,
[Fischer] said, regular political contacts between competent representa-
tives of both countries; for example, it would be possible for the Foreign
Minister to hold such consultations in the second half of 1977 in connec-
tion with the UNGA in Washington. The May 18 signing of the ENMOD
Treaty4 could be another such occasion. Further steps could be taken
in arriving at agreements, and Fischer asserted it would not be neces-
sary to elaborate on this point.
3. Another area is trade relations, Fischer said, where the possibili-
ties are much greater than the present levels would indicate. There
were also possibilities for expanded commercial and business relations
and an exchange of appropriate information. Along the same lines, the
GDR still retained its interest in opening a trade office in New York.
4. One should not exclude the expansion also of cultural exchanges.
Both sides know what has been done until now, and know more can
be done. The GDR, Fischer said, is ready to do more, not only in
“purely” cultural exchanges. There could also be exchanges on lan-
guage training, textbooks, and an agreement between news agencies
of both countries.
5. In humanitarian cases, the US knows the principled position and
practice of the GDR. Each side of course is free to decide how it wishes
to resolve such cases. As far as the GDR is concerned, as Ambassador
Sieber had informed Under Secretary Habib,5 there were no open ques-
tions in this area.
6. Fischer suggested both sides might also consider easing the
procedures for granting visas, and went on to say that activities of
4 The Environmental Modification Convention (ENMOD), formally known as The
Convention on Prohibition of Military or any Other Hostile Use of Environmental Modifi-
cation Techniques, which banned the use of military and hostile techniques for weather
modification, opened for signatures in Geneva on May 18, 1977, and entered into force
ratified the convention on January 17, 1980.
5 In a meeting with Habib on April 26, Sieber conveyed a message for Vance
from Fischer (on Honecker’s behalf) that “requests made to GDR authorities by official
representatives of the US for authorization of marriages between GDR citizens and US
citizens, as well as for emigration (uebersiedlung), have been carefully examined. All
these requests have been approved.” (Telegram 94855 to East Berlin, April 27; National

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
journalists could also be alleviated. In this regard, he asserted, the GDR
is “generous”. It had granted accreditation to an AP correspondent in
Copenhagen, and had given him a one year visa. Fischer suggested
there should be reciprocal action in granting visas, which would apply
first to accredited journalists.
7. Fischer concluded that there were further details and proposals
in the aide memoire which he would not dwell on. In the interest of
implementing CSCE there were a number of possibilities inherent in
the situation that should make it possible for an expansion of relations;
for its part, the GDR is prepared to do so.
8. Charge thanked Fischer for his presentation and said that
careful attention and study would be given to the aide memoire. The
US also favored the development of constructive relations wherever
possible, and the Charge was pleased to hear the GDR desired to
expand relations with the US. While we would respond later in
detail to the aide memoire after we had had a chance to study it
carefully, Charge said he wished to make several preliminary com-
ments in response to the Foreign Minister’s remarks. First of all, it
would be useful to know what the Foreign Minister meant when
he referred to further progress in treaty or “agreement” matters.
Fischer said he had in mind such things as the Fisheries Agreement,
Postal Agreement, a Consular Convention, etc.
9. Charge noted that, with respect to the Consular Convention, it
was our impression, as Charge had recently told Geyer (who was
present), that the ball was in the GDR court. After the last round of
negotiations, we had presented a counter-draft to the GDR side and
had heard nothing official from them since. Conclusion of a Consular
Convention would contribute significantly to the further development
of our relations.
10. Fischer said, “You know our position.” We don’t feel we have
to give you an answer because the US side has not responded to
GDR proposals which, in the GDR’s view, represented a compromise
between the positions of the two countries. However, since the US side
wished to pursue the matter further, he saw no reason why responsible
officials from the MFA’s Consular section could not meet with Embassy
officials in the near future to see what possibilities might exist for the
next round of negotiations. Charge said that while our viewpoint might
be different about who owes whom a reply, we would be pleased to
get together with the MFA’s Consular division.
11. Charge also noted he had suggested some time ago, in connec-
tion with our interest in a claims settlement, that a State Department
lawyer would be willing to come to Berlin for the purpose of gaining
a better understanding of pertinent GDR regulations and for informing
GDR officials about US procedures and practices in claims matters.

German Democratic Republic
Conversely, we would be prepared to receive an appropriate GDR
official in Washington for such discussions. As of now, we have heard
nothing about this suggestion. Fischer replied that the absence of any
mention of claims in their aide memoire did not mean that they had
intended to exclude the subject; but it was a matter of their “physical
capacity” since they were involved in negotiating claims settlements
with a number of countries. They remain interested in being in contact
with us, Fischer said, and he would ask a responsible officer to talk
with us about “preparations for negotiations.” Charge said he thought
this could be a useful step.
12. Charge went on to note that, since the Foreign Minister had
mentioned the matter of journalists, he had a comment to make.
As the Foreign Minister knew, US journalists had expressed an
interest in being accredited to the GDR as well as to other countries
where they might be resident. Until now, there had been no movement
in this area.
13. Fischer responded, saying that the GDR wanted to facilitate
the activities of journalists, but he wondered whether it would be
right to grant double accreditation. The present arrangement, with
accreditation for an AP correspondent in Copenhagen, is better than
giving double accreditation to American journalists in Bonn or West
Berlin. Were the GDR to do so, he was afraid that some FRG politicians
would take it as a demonstration of the “Old Germany”, and the GDR
was not prepared to give anyone such an idea. They were ready to
accredit US journalists who are in Western Europe but not those in
Bonn or West Berlin. Perhaps the time will come one day when US
correspondents in the FRG might also be accredited to the GDR, but
both Fischer and the Charge would probably be older and grayer
by then.
14. On humanitarian cases, Charge noted we were pleased by
progress we had noted recently. It was a good step forward, as a result
of Amb. Sieber’s statement to Mr. Habib that all outstanding cases
have been satisfactorily resolved, we had checked our files and our
records were somewhat different and Charge had asked our Consular
section to be in touch with the MFA’s Consular section on the matter,
and therefore Charge would not bother the Foreign Minister with
the details. We would, at the same time, hope that cases involving
emergency family reunification will also be resolved satisfactorily.
Fischer made no comment on emergency family reunification cases
and said that, as long as Embassy and MFA Consular section officers
were in touch on other cases he saw no need to respond.
15. Meeting closed with Charge reiterating we would be in touch
as appropriate with MFA once we had had opportunity to study “non-
paper” thoroughly.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
16. Embassy’s comments on “non-paper” aide memoire follow
septel.6
Polansky
mémoire was “tendentious and disingenuous,“ and contained nothing new. The Embassy
recommended that, though prospects in the cultural area appeared to be improving,
there was no reason to accede to East German desires for regular, high-level political
118.
Telegram From the Embassy in the German Democratic
Republic to the Department of State1
6885. Subject: Presentation of Credentials to Chairman of State
Summary: In a fifty-minute meeting following the presentation
of my credentials today, Chairman of State Council Honecker repeat-
edly stressed the GDR’s desire to move forward in developing good
bilateral relations with the United States. In this connection he empha-
sized the need for good US-Soviet relations as a factor in developing
US–GDR cooperation. He hoped the dialogue between the US and
the Soviet Union on SALT and other such matters would continue.
Honecker supported the Foreign Minister’s forthcoming comments (ref
A) on outstanding bilateral issues of interest to us, including humanitar-
Confidential; Immediate.
status of the grain harvest in the German Democratic Republic and the challenges faced
by the East German Government. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
which reported the conversation between Bolen and Foreign Minister Fischer. See foot-
note 6 below.
tion to be made by Bolen in his meeting with Honecker. Bolen was instructed to stress,
among other things, that progress in bilateral relations depended on a fruitful and quick
resolution of the Consular Convention between the two countries. (National Archives,

German Democratic Republic
ian cases, claims and Consular Convention. The Chairman raised the
issue of the substantial US trade surplus with the GDR, alluded to
Jackson-Vanik and expressed hope ways could be found to increase
GDR exports to the US. Honecker was pleased about the Secretary’s
willingness to meet with Foreign Minister Fischer at the UNGA and
agreed that this meeting could be helpful in bringing about progress
on a range of issues of interest to both countries. End summary.
1. I met with Chairman of State Council Honecker August 22
to present my letter of credence and letter of recall of Ambassador
Cooper. In a brief formal ceremony I expressed appreciation for Hon-
ecker’s kindness in receiving me so soon after my arrival three days
ago. I conveyed greetings from the people and Government of the
United States. I expressed our hope and expectation that relations
between the United States and the GDR will be broadened and deep-
ened in the months and years to come. I told Honecker it would be
my task and my pleasure to work toward that goal. I expressed appreci-
ation for the warm welcome I had received and indicated my desire
to work with him and other leaders to move our relations forward.
2. Honecker in a brief response welcomed me to the GDR and
requested that I convey greetings to the people and Government of
the United States. He said the GDR wanted to develop good relations
with the United States. He wished me success in my missions.
3. After the formal ceremony, Honecker invited me to his office
for a private chat which lasted about fifty minutes. Also present were
Secretary of Council of State Eichler and Deputy Foreign Minister
Grunert. Honecker began the meeting by reiterating the GDR desire
to develop good relations with the United States. He noted that such
relations would be mutually beneficial to our countries and would
contribute to better overall East-West relations. He also commented
on US-Soviet relations, CSCE, the GDR May 12 aide memoire on US–
GDR bilateral relations, trade imbalance, and cultural cooperation.4
4. US-Soviet relations. Honecker emphasized repeatedly the need
for good US-Soviet relations. He hoped a peaceful dialogue between
the US and the Soviets on SALT and other matters would continue in
the interest of peace. He said there was no point in debating the merits
of capitalism vs. socialism. There was “simply no alternative to peaceful
coexistence.” US–GDR relations would flourish better in an atmosphere
of detente. He saw this as very important.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
5. I called Honecker’s attention to President Carter’s July 21 speech
on US-Soviet relations.5 I noted our desire for strategic arms limitations,
reduction in and freeze on new technology which would provide bal-
anced security for both sides. I told Honecker we were seeking a com-
prehensive test ban on nuclear weapons and desired to move forward
on MBFR. I also mentioned the Indian Ocean talks and the Secretary’s
forthcoming meeting with Foreign Minister Gromyko on SALT. I told
Honecker we welcomed President Brezhnev’s depiction of President
Carter’s speech as positive, and his willingness to seek solutions. I
expressed the belief there was good reason to hope for continued
development of detente.
6. I also told Honecker we recognized the difference in political
systems which stems from history, different beliefs and values; certain
competition would continue between the two systems. Nevertheless,
there were overlapping interests; it was important for both sides to
build on these common interests in order to develop cooperation
between East and West based on mutual respect and equality.
7. US–GDR bilateral relations. Honecker mentioned the GDR May
12 aide memoire containing his government’s proposals for further
developing relations with the United States. I noted that Foreign
Minister Fischer had called this aide memoire to my attention in our
meeting on August 19.6 Honecker said the GDR wanted to move for-
ward in implementing these proposals, which were consistent with the
Helsinki Final Act.
8. I told Honecker that I had discussed overall US–GDR relations
with Ambassadors Cooper and Sieber, senior officials in the Executive
Branch, and Members of Congress. I was aware there had been impor-
tant step by step developments of our relations. I reiterated the adminis-
tration’s desire to build on this record and to broaden and deepen
relations. This desire for better relations was grounded in our wish to
develop more stable and beneficial relations between the peoples of
the East and West and to move forward on the current agenda on
Conference in Charleston, South Carolina. While acknowledging the deep philosophical
and cultural differences between the Soviet Union and the United States, Carter expressed
his conviction that the Soviet Union and the United States would continue to reach
agreements in areas of mutual interest. If the Soviet strategic buildup could be controlled,
Carter said, “then we are prepared to limit our own strategic programs.” The President
also stressed that the administration’s commitment to human rights was neither a ploy,
nor targeted at any one country, and that U.S. policy remains the “sincere expression
6 Bolen reported on his conversation with Fischer in telegram 6855 from East Berlin,
August 19. The discussion covered human rights, the issue of claims between the two
countries, as well as progress on the cultural convention. (National Archives, RG 59,
Central Foreign Policy File, D770300–0700)

German Democratic Republic
East-West relations. I told Honecker that good US–GDR relations are
an essential ingredient in this effort.
9. I informed Honecker that I had given my views on ways to
move our bilateral relations forward in an earlier conversation with
Foreign Minister Fischer. However, in view of their importance, I felt
it necessary to repeat them in part.
10. Humanitarian cases. I expressed appreciation for the progress
in resolving humanitarian cases involving American citizens and their
relatives in the GDR.7 I told Honecker this progress had been noted
with favor in the Congress and among the American public; it had
created a better atmosphere for the future development of our relations.
I stressed the importance American people attach to ethnic and family
ties and expressed the view that emergency visitation cases to the US
involving GDR citizens should be processed quickly. This would be
helpful in maintaining the favorable impression already created and
support further development of our relations. Honecker indicated he
understood the importance the US attached to this matter. The Foreign
Minister’s views on the handling of cases of this kind had his total
support. The GDR was prepared to cooperate. Honecker added that
he would like to see more Americans visit the GDR; “we need more
American tourists.”
11. Claims. I told Honecker about my conversation with the Foreign
Minister on claims settlement and my proposal that officials meet to
discuss claims procedures in our respective countries. The central pur-
pose of this proposal would be to work out principles and procedures
which would facilitate future negotiations. Honecker said he agreed
with this proposal.
12. I also raised the Jewish claims issue with Honecker. I told
him that talks with the Conference on Jewish Material Claims should
continue with a view to finding a solution. Such talks would find a
favorable echo in the Congress and the public. Honecker said the GDR
had not broken off the talks. Perhaps the earlier GDR offer to the
conference had been misunderstood. He noted that talks had been
conducted with the Committee on Anti-Fascist Resistance Fighters and
suggested that they should continue. He then launched into a long
historical review of his persecution by the Nazis, noted that he had
witnessed the persecution of Jews, and asserted there was no discrimi-
7 In a meeting with Habib on April 26, Sieber delivered a message from Fischer to
Vance stating that “all requests made to the GDR authorities by official representatives
of the U.S. for authorization of marriages between GDR citizens and U.S. citizens, as
well as for emigration (uebersiedlung) have been carefully examined. All these requests
have been approved.” (Telegram 94855 to East Berlin, April 27; National Archives, RG

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
nation of Jews in the GDR; they were free to practice their religion. He
commented on the post-war difficulty in developing the GDR economy
and said the creation of the GDR was a form of compensation. Com-
ment: I gained the impression that Honecker was prepared to continue
the dialogue with the conference, but was concerned about limited
GDR means to meet the conference request.
13. Consular Convention: I emphasized that the Consular Con-
vention was of key importance. I wanted to underscore this issue. I
told him we see the Consular Convention as basic for good relations
between states. Conclusion of a Consular Convention would contribute
to positive development of our relations. As I had indicated earlier we
seek positive development; since the American public and the Congress
attach great importance to consular protection, it was necessary to have
a Consular Convention. I noted this matter had been discussed with
the Foreign Minister and stressed the importance of putting this matter
behind and providing a basis for regularizing our relations. One possi-
ble compromise solution to the nationality question had been presented
to the Foreign Minister. Honecker said he supported the Foreign Minis-
ter’s comments and hoped for an early conclusion to a consular agree-
ment: “We should devote our best efforts to finding a solution.”
14. Trade. Honecker raised the question of the trade imbalance
between the US and the GDR. Imports from the US amounted to 1.4
billion mark; US imports from the GDR totaled only 50 million mark.
Honecker referred to the “legislation” and expressed the hope that our
economic counselors would find a way to expand trade. I noted the
current growth in the expansion of trade between the US and the GDR.
We appreciated the grain trade and would remain a reliable supplier.
I referred to my talks in New York with American business firms,
including banks. I informed him that the GDR enjoyed a good reputa-
tion in the American business community. Contacts between the GDR
trade organizations and American firms were increasing. We encourage
these developments as the best way to proceed at this time. I noted
the GDR trade and economic councils were operational. I mentioned
my talks with the Department of Commerce and our desire to continue
private and official participation in the Leipzig Fair, and to send techni-
cal sales seminars to the GDR to discuss sales potentials. I also men-
tioned that we were prepared to review GDR requests for representa-
tion of other trade organizations in the United States, depending on
the state of our relations.
15. Cultural. Honecker also took the initiative in expressing the
desire for expansion of cultural exchanges with the United States. In
this connection he noted that the GDR was sending the world-famous
Dresden art exhibit to the United States at great expense to the GDR.
I told him we favor expanded exchanges in academic, scientific, cultural

German Democratic Republic
and sports fields. I expressed regret that some of our proposals for
cultural presentations in the GDR in 1977 had not materialized. I hoped
we could implement these proposals in early 1978. In the meantime, our
officials could work toward a cultural agreement that would stimulate
future exchanges in the cultural field.
16. Secretary’s meeting with Foreign Minister Fischer. I informed
Honecker that Secretary Vance is prepared to meet with Foreign
Minister Fischer at the UNGA if this could be worked out on their
respective schedules. I stressed the importance of progress in the next
few weeks in developing our relations to insure a fruitful meeting
between the Secretary and Foreign Minister Fischer and to provide a
backdrop for further development of relations. Honecker agreed and
said he was pleased to have such a “dynamic Ambassador from the
United States.” He stressed his willingness to cooperate in developing
our relations. He wished me a successful mission and said his door
was always open. He concluded the meeting by reiterating the GDR
desire for good relations with the United States and the importance of
continuing the detente process between the Soviet Union and the
United States as a factor in the development of US–GDR relations.
Bolen
119.
Telegram From Secretary of State Vance to the Embassy in
the German Democratic Republic1
Secto 10027. Subject: Fischer Bilateral With Secretary.
1. Centerpiece of 45-minute bilateral between GDR Foreign Minis-
ter and Secretary September 30 was a US–GDR Consular Convention,
with Fischer proposing a cultural agreement, too. They also touched
upon US-Soviet relations, which both agreed had improved over the
past ten days, and GDR–FRG relations, which Fischer, claimed were
“better than their reputation”.
2. Referring to the Consular Convention as “the rock that might
be moved from the road”, Fischer said that nationality was the key
Confidential; Priority. Sent for information to the Department of State and Bonn.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
problem. “We cannot,” he said, “have dual nationalities without citi-
zenship.” Recognizing, however, that we had made a Consular Con-
vention “a prerequisite for other relations,” he said that he found the
Secretary’s proposal of an agreement with a separate exchange of letters
on the difficult nationality question “reasonable and workable”. Such
“separate papers that would be a constituent part of the agreement”
offered the possibility of success. Both agreed to ask their staffs to work
out the details.
3. In closing, Fischer volunteered that his meeting earlier in the
day with FRG Foreign Minister Genscher had “not been the first but
the first of a constructive nature”. The two, he said, had discussed
seeking accommodation on outstanding issues in a “businesslike man-
ner”.2 The GDR, he concluded, will do all it can to improve its relations
with the FRG because of their importance to Europe as a whole, but,
he warned, “this does not mean that the GDR will change the priorities
of its foreign policy”.
4. Full memcon follows septel.3
Vance
received on the bilateral meeting from the West German representative to the Group of
3 No separate memorandum of conversation or telegram was found.
120.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
the Federal Republic of Germany1
240076. Subject: Consular Convention With GDR.2 Ref: A) Secto
Confidential; Immediate. Drafted by Gray; cleared by Woessner and in L/M, L/EUR,

German Democratic Republic
1. On basis of broad agreement reached on separate repeat separate
exchange of letters on nationality issue (ref A) Department is prepared
and SCA/SCS; approved by Goodby. Sent for information to West Berlin, East Berlin,
London, Moscow, Paris, and USNATO.
2 The negotiations on the Consular Convention between the United States and the
German Democratic Republic reached an impasse on the handling of consular access to
German nationals and the definition of German nationals. Dubbed the “nationality ques-
tion,” it sought to preserve West German access on consular matters in the United States to
all German nationals, including those from East Germany. The West German Government
maintained that there was one German citizenship—not East and West German citizens—
and that Bonn’s representatives retained the right to represent German nationals abroad.
In an oral message delivered to Vest on October 31, Von Staden stated “We have never had
any doubts that the United States will support us in the questions pertaining to German
citizenship” given that “the continuation of German citizenship is one of the elements of
the unsolved German question.” The Federal Republic of Germany’s concern, Van Staden
continued, was that Washington not commit, during Consular Convention negotiations,
to the thesis of two German nations. (Telegram 261674 to Bonn, November 2; National
3 See Document 119.
to approach Klobes and discuss draft language for separate statements on the question
of German nationality as well as possible dates to begin negotiations on other issues
concerning the Consular Convention. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
File, D770320–0268) The nationality question revolved around East German attempts to
define, within the Consular Convention, a separate East German nationality. In his
inaugural address to the Bundestag, West German Chancellor Brandt coined the “two
states, one nation” policy to deal with the nationality question. The U.S. Government
adopted the same policy after it recognized the German Democratic Republic on Septem-
ber 4, 1974, and supported the Federal Republic of Germany as the sole legitimate
successor of the German state.
of the West German Government to the proposed unilateral declarations on nationality
to be delivered at the signing of the Consular Convention between the United States
and the German Democratic Republic. Von Braunmuehl, the West German representative
in the Bonn Group, stressed that the U.S. position on the nationality question was critical
to the West German Government, and asked that the U.S. Government find a way to
stress that the Consular Convention did not represent U.S. acquiescence to the East
German position (i.e. two German nations). The declaration, Von Braunmuehl stressed,
should be drafted in such a way as to prevent its use by the German Democratic Republic
in arguing that the United States had accepted its position and, consequently, facilitate
its use by the Federal Republic of Germany to argue the contrary. (National Archives,
Embassy with draft language on the nationality question. The proposed language, which
was for “background purposes only and is not repeat not authorized for release to GDR”
stressed that nationality cannot be defined in a Consular Convention, that it is a matter
for each state to decide who are its nationals, and that any such definition would have
no binding effect on a third state which may hold different views. (National Archives,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
to proceed with initial Polansky approach to Klobes on Consular Con-
vention (ref B). Before doing so, however, Embassy Bonn should inform
Von Braunmuehl of broad agreement reached between Fischer and
Secretary and of our intent to proceed with approach to Klobes and,
with reference to his earlier expressed concerns (ref C), should reassure
him along following lines.
A. We will provide the FRG a separate bilateral assurance (prefera-
bly oral), as requested by Genscher in his September 30 breakfast
with Secretary, that U.S. practice respecting rights of FRG Consuls in
providing protection for German nationals will not change as a result
of the Consular Convention.7 This assurance will not repeat not provide
a right of first access by FRG Consuls to persons present in the U.S.
on the basis of GDR documentation. A request by the FRG for a USG
assurance on this latter point has previously been rejected.
B. Recognizing the FRG’s concerns that we not give the GDR
ammunition that it could throw back at the FRG, we will delete all but
the first sentence of para. 6A of the draft US statement (ref D).
C. With regard to the concerns expressed in paras. 5 and 6, ref C,
we will reserve our position to the extent of adding “and cannot be
taken as representing, in whole or in part, the views of my government
on this issue” to the end of para. 7, ref. D.
2. FYI. Department agrees with EmbOff’s position para. 5, ref. C
and does not believe reservation on nationality can be linked to retained
responsibilities for Germany as a whole. In general, Von Braunmuehl’s
contention that nationality is an essential element of statehood is unper-
suasive, since there are numerous contemporary examples of multi-
national states (e.g., UK, Soviet Union, CSSR, Yugoslavia), nations that
are divided into two or more states (e.g., China, Korea) and nations
that are stateless (e.g., Macedonia). In particular, such a linking of
nationality and statehood seems to fly in the face of past German
7 In a meeting at the United Nations on September 30, Vance and Genscher discussed
the situation in the Middle East, SALT, MBFR, U.S.-Soviet relations, FRG-Soviet relations,
and the ongoing U.S.–GDR negotiations on a Consular Convention. Stressing that the
United States had a special responsibility for Germany, Genscher asked Vance that the
United States make “the most unequivocal statement by the US endorsing the FRG
concept of German sovereignty.” Vance agreed and told Genscher that the United States
would provide the West German Government with a separate assurance that the exchange
of notes between the United States and the German Democratic Republic would not affect
the West German concept of sovereignty. (Memorandum of Conversation, September
30; Department of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Cyrus R. Vance, Secretary of

German Democratic Republic
argumentation on behalf of the “concept of the nation” which clearly
differentiates between the two in order to preserve a rubric for the
unity of the German people. End FYI.
3. Report Von Braunmuehl’s reaction ASAP.8
Christopher
8 Von Braunmuehl’s reaction was reported in telegram 16784 from Bonn,
October 7. Referencing the Vance-Genscher bilateral meeting at the United Nations,
Von Braunmuehl told the Embassy that the West German Foreign Ministry prepared a
statement with suggestions for the U.S. unilateral declaration to be delivered at the
signing of the U.S.–GDR Consular Convention. The West German draft stressed that
the German nationality question remains an unresolved issue between the Federal Repub-
lic of Germany and the German Democratic Republic and that the U.S. signing of the
Consular Convention with the German Democratic Republic did not prejudice the FRG
gram 246330 to multiple posts, October 13, the Department informed the Embassy of a
revised draft that would be submitted for discussion in the Bonn Group. The draft
stressed that the signing of the Consular Convention between the United States and the
German Democratic Republic “cannot affect the dispute regarding the issue of German
121.
Report Prepared in the Bureau of Intelligence and Research,
Department of State1
Report No. 954
Washington, April 11, 1978
THE PROSPECTS FOR DOMESTIC STABILITY IN THE GDR
Summary
During 1977 the East German leadership moved with fair success
to counter the popular unrest and intellectual dissent that made 1976
a rough year. The flood of requests to emigrate to West Germany
was halted, critical intellectuals were largely silenced, and church-state
relations were restored to a reasonably normal condition. The regime’s
Analysis for the Commonwealth and Eastern Europe, Lot 92D468, Office Subject Files,
Secret; Noforn. Prepared by Robert Rackmales; approved by Paul K. Cook.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
demonstrated capacity to react to challenges with a shrewd mixture
of toughness and flexibility makes it unlikely that the GDR will be
unable to handle domestic problems in the future.
Domestic tensions in the German Democratic Republic gradually
subsided last year. The confrontations of 1976—with church authorities,
critical intellectuals, the increasing number of GDR citizens submitting
requests to emigrate to the West—were mitigated. The tactics used by
the Honecker regime to suppress or disperse its critics at times aroused
international censure (in October 1977, Amnesty International issued
a report sharply critical of the GDR2). On the whole, however, the East
German leadership could feel at year’s end that its international image
had not suffered irremediable damage and that its relations with the
West had remained on a more or less even keel.
The basic question posed by the events of the past two years is: did
1977 see merely a temporary halting of a tendency toward increasing
domestic instability, or did the reduction in tensions reflect the contin-
uation of a long-term trend toward a more stable East Germany?
While domestic instability in any of the East European Warsaw
Pact states could hamper prospects for continued East-West detente,
nowhere would the threat of serious international repercussions be
greater than in the case of the GDR. The carefully crafted accommoda-
tions regarding Berlin and inter-German relations that made possible
the Helsinki accords and have reduced international tensions in Central
Europe to their lowest level since the early 1930s would be unlikely
to survive a major upheaval in East Germany.
Changing Perceptions of GDR Stability
Several months after the construction of the Berlin Wall in 1961,
the consensus of Western observers was that the strength of the latent
anti-regime forces in East Germany was on the increase. Nevertheless,
the decade that followed turned out to be one of relative economic,
political, and social stability in the GDR. By 1970—the last full year of
Walter Ulbricht’s rule—US observers noted, in contrast to the earlier
view, that the average East German seemed to have become resigned
to the system imposed on him and had developed a certain sense of
pride in the economic development of East Germany.
The impression of a growing and more broadly based stability—
one resting on more than an efficient security apparatus and the ulti-
mate threat of Soviet intervention—was further strengthened following
2 In its 1977 report (accessed online), Amnesty International alleged that there were
several thousand political prisoners in East Germany in the 1976–1977 period covered
by the report, many of whom were being released to West Germany in exchange for goods.

German Democratic Republic
the smooth political succession from an aging and increasingly nation-
alistic Ulbricht to Erich Honecker. Honecker, while working within a
leadership group virtually identical to that over which Ulbricht had
presided, introduced some notable changes of emphasis. Honecker’s
less strident, more down-to-earth, and increasingly consumer-oriented
approach proved to be reassuring to both his domestic and his foreign
audiences. While many of his changes were more of style than of
substance, a further lowering of tensions was evident. After several
years of Honecker’s leadership, US observers noted further improve-
ment in the GDR’s domestic stability—most East Germans had come
to terms with the Communist regime and accepted the reality of Com-
munist rule. Political analysts saw the trend of recent years toward
accommodation between the ruled and the rulers as having given the
regime increased confidence in its legitimacy and as having strength-
ened the faction in the party which favored securing the cooperation
of the people by tactics of persuasion and reward instead of relying
on the discredited policies of coercion and arbitrary rule.
New Challenges Arise
In the mid-1970s, however, signs of new strains in the East German
body politic began to accumulate. While the results of West Germany’s
Ostpolitik, superpower detente, and the series of international agree-
ments that followed in their wake permitted the GDR to achieve its
long-sought goal of diplomatic recognition by the Western powers,
the ferment that they caused within East Germany turned out to be
substantial. The developments that appear to have had the strongest
domestic impact included:
—the GDR’s heavily publicized adherence to the Helsinki Final
Act and to other international human rights covenants;
—the vast increase in West German travel to the GDR and in the
audience for FRG television broadcasts in East Germany following
the conclusion of the Basic Treaty between the two German states in
1973; and
—the ideological challenge to orthodoxy posed by the Eurocommu-
nist parties.
By the summer of 1976 the symptoms of the unrest provoked by
these events and trends were unmistakable:
—Requests by East Germans to emigrate to the FRG, many explic-
itly citing the Helsinki Final Act, reached more than 100,000.
—Critical intellectuals, such as physicist Robert Havemann and
songwriter Wolf Biermann, became more outspoken and received
greater attention in Western, including Eurocommunist, media.
—Church-state relations underwent their sharpest decline since
the 1950s after the suicide of an East German clergyman.
The political tensions raised by these developments did not consti-
tute an immediate threat to the GDR’s internal stability. Even before

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
the regime’s countermeasures (see below), there was no evidence to
suggest that collective political protest—violent or otherwise—was in
the offing. Summing up the situation during its most acute phase, an
East German writer told a Western journalist: “There isn’t going to be
an explosion here. But there is tension now and a feeling that something
is going on that has not yet run its course.”
The Regime Responds
Employing a broad range of tactics, from repressive to conciliatory
depending on the nature of the perceived threat, the Honecker regime,
beginning in late 1976, attempted with considerable success to dampen
the effects of these developments. At one extreme, the expatriation of
Biermann and the placing of Havemann under house arrest gave notice
of the limits of official tolerance. Dozens of members of the GDR’s
cultural elite followed Biermann into exile during 1977. On the other
hand, the regime’s stance vis-a-vis the church was far more conciliatory.
The West German Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung noted in late 1977 that
“relations between the state apparatus and the church have calmed
strikingly” and attributed the change to a desire on the part of the
regime to “relax tensions.” Somewhere between those two tactics were
the selective harassment and denials of applications of prospective
emigres who cited the Helsinki Accords as the basis for their requests
(family reunification requests continued to be processed at the same
rate as in previous years).
As a result of the regime’s counter-campaign, the ferment that
characterized 1976 was reduced in scope and intensity. A Western
journalist noted that the tensions that had gripped East Germany in
1976 “appeared spent” by late 1977, leaving behind an impression of
“lethargy and gloom.” There was such continued evidence of unrest
as antisocial behavior by youth; a serious clash between youth and
police during GDR national day celebrations in East Berlin was the
most striking exception to the generally quiet domestic scene in 1977.
There was also an apparent deterioration of labor discipline; some
workers reportedly demanded a portion of their salaries in hard cur-
rency. But the dominant mood of the populace at the beginning of
1978 was one of political apathy and of seeking refuge in material
compensation and private family interests.
The “Manifesto” Episode
Although its direct relationship to GDR domestic stability is moot,
the purported opposition “Manifesto” recently published in West Ger-
many sheds some light on the two external factors that most impinge
on the GDR’s internal stability—the Soviet Union and West Germany.
The document was published in two installments by Der Spiegel
in its first two issues of 1978. The magazine reported that the “Mani-

German Democratic Republic
festo” had been compiled by members of a “League of Democratic
German Communists,” supposedly consisting of “middle and senior
level” party members. The existence of such a group, either inside or
outside the party, was termed “extremely doubtful” by the West Ger-
man Foreign Office, a view shared by the vast majority of Western
observers.
While the impact of the “Manifesto” within East Germany appears
to have been minimal, the controversy following its publication and
the retaliatory closure of Der Spiegel’s office in East Berlin threatened,
for a time, to disrupt FRG–GDR relations. Both sides, however, tried
to head off that outcome and to underline their determination to con-
tinue a policy of cooperation. Thus, when Chancellor Schmidt offered
to send a personal emissary, State Secretary Hans Jurgen Wischnewski,
to East Berlin in late January for talks with top GDR officials, Honecker
promptly accepted. While the details of Wischnewski’s discussions are
not known,3 he appears to have succeeded in restoring inter-German
relations to their status quo ante.
Conclusions and Prospects
During the decade after the Berlin Wall, Western observers initially
tended to overstate the dangers to the GDR regime of popular opposi-
tion. Gradually, they began to minimize the continuing vulnerability
of the regime to internal unrest. The events of the past two years
suggest that neither approach is necessarily a guide to estimating the
prospects for the continuing stability of the GDR in the 1980s.
The GDR has special vulnerabilities but also certain advantages in
dealing with them.
East Germany’s vulnerabilities are well known:
—The absence of a firm national identity makes the goal of regime
legitimacy more difficult to achieve in the GDR than elsewhere in
East Europe.
—The constant contrast with West Germany is damaging to the
regime’s image and to popular morale.
—The GDR is the most exposed of the East European states to
Western media influence because most East German citizens regularly
watch FRG television.
—The highly visible Soviet military and political presence con-
stantly nourishes strong anti-Russian popular sentiments dating from
World War II and before.
Tending to offset these vulnerabilities are the advantages that the
GDR derives, in many cases, from the same set of circumstances:
3 A report of Wischnewski’s conversations in East Berlin is in Akten zur Auswärtigen

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
—The lack of national legitimacy forces the regime to compensate
by closely monitoring popular attitudes and by seeking—when it is
not constrained by ideological or domestic security considerations—
to be responsive to popular grievances.
—The competition with the FRG has induced the regime to cater
to the consumer (the country already has the highest standard of living
in Eastern Europe) and to emphasize economic incentives and
productivity.
—East Germans recognize that their access to millions of West
German visitors and to Western television are benefits that are not
enjoyed by other East Europeans and that could be cut off if the regime
felt greatly threatened by internal unrest. Thus, they have a consider-
able stake in not “rocking the boat.”
—The Soviet presence is a reminder both of Moscow’s ability to
intervene in the event of serious internal disruption in East Germany
and of the threat that instability in the GDR would pose to the balance
of power and peace in Europe.
These two sets of factors, combined with the GDR leaders’ demon-
strated capacity to react to challenges with a shrewd mixture of tough-
ness and flexibility suggest that the regime will continue to be able to
handle domestic problems.
Political control, however, will not narrow the psychological chasm
which separates the leadership from the populace. Only a major reduc-
tion in restrictions on travel to the West or a dramatic loosening of
ideological controls—neither of which the leadership feels secure
enough to undertake—could reduce the mistrust with which regime
and citizenry view each other. Popular disaffection will probably con-
tinue to surface from time to time in the form of youth disturbances
or sporadic worker unrest.

German Democratic Republic
122.
Memorandum of Conversation1
SUBJECT
US–GDR Relations
PARTICIPANTS
GDR
Foreign Minister Oskar Fischer
Ambassador Rolf Sieber
Ambassador Harald Rose, MFA
Manfred Niklas, MFA
Paul Ringleb (interpreter)
US
The Secretary
Assistant Secretary George Vest
William M. Woessner, Director, EUR/CE
Victor Gray, EUR/CE (notetaker)
Harry Obst (interpreter)
After initial pleasantries concerning the Dresden exhibit,2 the
Secretary raised the subject of the consular convention, saying that
without progress in this area, meaningful progress in our general
relations would be very difficult. He reminded Fischer that, when the
two last met in September, he (the Secretary) had proposed separate
statements on the nationality question and was now puzzled by the
lack of progress, given Fischer’s agreement to that proposal.3 Fischer
replied that he too was puzzled. Separate statements were indeed a
good idea but should not present the other party with a problem it
could not digest. Fischer said that he had understood in September
that each party would address its own problem. He had also under-
stood that the U.S. had no treaties with other countries containing
nationality clauses. Since then, he said, he had learned that the U.S.
had such treaties with the U.K. and Japan. He then produced a text,
Analysis for the Commonwealth and Eastern Europe, Office Subject Files, 1967–1985,
8; cleared by Vest and Woessner; approved by Anderson on June 16. The meeting took
place in the Secretary’s office.
2 Fischer was in New York for the UN Special Session on Disarmament and traveled
to Washington to meet with Vance. On June 1, the Smithsonian’s National Gallery opened
an exhibit entitled “The Splendor of Dresden: Five Centuries of Art Collecting.” (Telegram
3 See Document 119.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
which, he said, was based on the language in those treaties, saying
that it was “a compromise but acceptable.” Fischer hoped that the
Secretary would also find this text acceptable and said it was a propi-
tious date for reaching a solution on this issue, since it was the anniver-
sary of the UK–GDR consular convention. The “compromise,” he said,
would involve the GDR’s acknowledging that the U.S. maintains its
position on nationality. (Comment: A later reading of the “compro-
mise” text indicated that Fischer meant here U.S. nationality not Ger-
man nationality.) “We would not,” he said, “want to hurt your ally
and we would not want to be embarrassed ourselves.” The Secretary
said that he would study the proposal “promptly” and would provide
the GDR with an answer “before he left next week.”
Turning to Africa, the Secretary said he had noticed in the press
that GDR Minister of Defense Hoffmann had recently visited Africa.
He asked Fischer for his views of developments in Zaire. Fischer said
that Hoffmann’s visit and the events in Zaire were two different things
having nothing to do with each other. He noted that the events in Zaire
had started while he (Fischer) was in Belgium. He had received many
questions there about whether there were GDR troops in Zaire. It was
obvious, he said, that he would not have wanted to have his official
visit to Brussels harmed by having troops in Zaire at the same time.
Fischer said that he “assumed” that the Secretary receives his informa-
tion not only from the press and added that events in Zaire are “an
internal affair in which the GDR is not involved.” Nobody from
outside, he said, should be involved in Zaire. “That goes for us and
for others.” Claiming that he could not tell the Secretary what is
happening, he repeated that, if there is trouble in Zaire, it is internal.
External activities can only hurt. He reminded the Secretary that GDR
has no official relations with Zaire but that that fact is not related to
recent events. The Secretary then referred specifically to reports that
the GDR was involved with the training of Katangan Gendarmes
who had invaded Shaba. Fischer responded with: “These reports will
not gain truth by their being repeated.” “We have trained nobody and
will not,” he added. “In general,” he said, “we have been concentrating
on economic assistance and the training of cadres in the economic and
education areas.” This he said “applies to all of Africa and to other
third world countries.” “You may, he concluded, “take that as
authentic.”
With regard to CSCE and human rights, the Secretary said that he
was pleased with recent progress concerning divided families. We
hoped, he said, that this progress will carry over to other cases, specif-
ically those of the Wilhelmi family and Gundrun Koch. The Secretary
also said that he would welcome consultation that would lead to
progress and less acrimony. He proposed, therefore, that Assistant

German Democratic Republic
Secretary Derian meet with her counterpart in the GDR. In this regard,
the Secretary noted that Derian would soon be in Europe and that such
a meeting would be helpful. Fischer said that he had absolutely nothing
against such a meeting and was, in fact, for it. Fischer allowed that he
was not a consular officer and was only interested in divided family
cases to the extent they cause “problems.” So far, he said, these cases
had “lacked sufficient mass” to attract his attention. His consular offi-
cers are addressing and solving these cases and, he added, “work on
the basis of binding political decisions.” In closing, Fischer noted that
the Secretary had raised only two names.
Returning to the consular convention Fischer said that he is against
linkages that “bind our legs so that we can not walk.” He was mention-
ing this, he said, in relation to the consular convention, since, if we were
linking problems, he would hope that the Secretary would carefully
examine his “compromise” proposal on this problem. Saying that he
owed it to himself and to the Secretary, he added that he had the
feeling that their talk in September had not been understood by their
staffs. He had, he said, left in September with the feeling that they had
“found a solution that would not involve one party expecting the other
party to do something it could not do.” That solution, which he termed
“a face saving solution,” would have involved both sides doing what
was “feasible.” Unfortunately, he said, things had then broken down.
The Secretary said that he, too, had thought they had a solution, accord-
ing to which each side would state its position on nationality. He hoped
that, after examining Fischer’s compromise proposal, we would put
“this matter aside once and for all,” to which Fischer replied: “We are
not treading on your feet, please don’t tread on ours.”
In response to the Secretary’s question as to whether he had any
other issues to raise, Fischer brought up the matter of a cultural agree-
ment. In the cultural area, he said, we have a “vivid exchange.” He
asked why this could not be carried forward on a “contractual basis.”
The volume of our trade compared to our overall relations, Fischer
said, is almost negligible. In the trade area, he claimed, there were
lost opportunities. Foreign Trade State Secretary Beil, he said, had
confirmed to him there are great opportunities not only in grain sales
but in general. There were, however, some barriers, namely MFN,
credits and the GDR’s fishing quota. That quota Fischer noted was
“zero point zero.” Removal of such barriers and expansion of trade
would have good effects on our bilateral relations and in the European
context. We had to consider, he concluded, not only our bilateral
relations but the “radiance” of those relations in Europe where we
have “greater responsibilities than normal.” “Frankly,” Fischer said,
“you could get along without relations with us and so could we. But
that would be irresponsible because of the impact on the European

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
climate.” “I have tried to be as precise as possible,” Fischer concluded,
“perhaps a bit brutal but nevertheless realistic.” The Secretary
responded that we, too, believe in realities and realize that our relations
can have a positive or negative effect on Europe. We hope, he said,
that that effect will be positive, since we favor detente. We realize, he
said, that we have differences but we should seek more common
ground in the future.
Fischer then said that he wanted to raise two additional economic
items. To be in a better position to realize the trade opportunities about
which he had just spoken, Fischer said that the GDR needed a trade
post in New York. Beil, he said, had left the U.S. with that very strong
impression. Fischer then asked about the possibility of long-term
multiple-entry visas for business and commercial travelers. At the Sec-
retary’s request, Assistant Secretary Vest informed Fischer that the
question of trade offices had been under review for some time.4 At the
moment, he said, we were not in a position to allow the opening of
new offices, since our general relations have “not sufficiently devel-
oped.” Vest then told Fischer that we had recently begun the process
which would lead to the granting of six-month multiple-entry visas to
GDR business travelers. Fischer asked if that process might be carried
out faster.
Concluding their conversation, the Secretary said that it had been
useful to talk directly. He said he would again examine Fischer’s pro-
posed text and review the other matters raised by him. He also said
that he looked forward to Assistant Secretary Derian’s visit to Berlin.5
Fischer told the Secretary that he proposed to characterize US/GDR
relations to the press as “normal but capable of development.” The
Secretary did not disagree.
4 The idea of the East German Government opening a trade bureau in New York
was brought up during Beil’s visit to Washington. Cooper told Beil that the United States
was unwilling to consider allowing the German Democratic Republic to open an official
trade representation without an agreement on the Consular Convention. However, the
Department was willing to consider allowing East German companies to open trade
Foreign Policy File, D770215–1088)
5 See Document 123.

German Democratic Republic
123.
Telegram From the Embassy in the German Democratic
Republic to the Department of State and Multiple
Diplomatic Posts1
6566. Subject: Visit of Assistant Secretary Derian to East Berlin:
Meeting With Deputy Foreign Minister Nier. Geneva Pass Assistant
Secretary Derian.
1. Summary: Assistant Secretary Derian’s October 6 meeting with
GDR Deputy Foreign Minister Nier fell into three categories: (1) a
general discussion of US and GDR policy approaches to human rights;
(2) US–GDR relations, with Nier providing some answers to issues
raised by Ambassador in September 19 meeting with GDR Foreign
Minister Fischer, and (3) a brief discussion of preparations for 1980
Madrid CSCE meeting. On human rights, Assistant Secretary Derian
outlined to Nier the domestic basis and reasons for the importance of
human rights in US foreign policy; she noted it was not directed against
any government or form of government and that it was not intended
to interfere with detente. It should be seen as an effort to discuss
humanitarian problems rationally. Nier welcomed Ms. Derian’s visit,
expressed the GDR’s hope for better US–GDR relations, and stated that,
with respect to human rights, the yardstick for measuring performance
must be determined in each country. On US–GDR bilateral relations,
Nier said (1) the GDR would receive Congressman English to discuss
narcotics issues, (2) preparations were underway to hold “Reflections
USA” in Leipzig in the fall of ’79 and that they would look favorably
on a 1980 showing at the Berlin TV tower, (3) the GDR would be
prepared to hold claims discussions next January–February, and (4)
the GDR had gone as far as it could on the Consular Convention but
would look at any new US counterproposals. The Ambassador noted
that Ms. Derian’s visit was an expression of US interest in developing
better relations and welcomed Nier’s remarks on specific items of US–
GDR business. Nier, in conclusion, referred to the “constructive at-
mosphere” which had prevailed during the talks and expressed the
hope Ms. Derian could come back to Berlin. We think Asst Sec Derian’s
visit was positive in tone and content, and useful to both sides. End
summary.
2. Asst Sec Derian, accompanied by the Ambassador, DCM, Politi-
cal Section Chief and Staff Assistant Heaphy, met with Deputy Foreign
Confidential; Immediate. Sent to Warsaw, Belgrade, Bonn, Bucharest, Budapest, Geneva,
London, Moscow, Paris, Prague, Sofia, West Berlin, and USNATO.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
Minister Nier, Krabatsch and Geyer at the MFA October 6 for approxi-
mately 1½ hours.
3. Nier opened the meeting by welcoming Ms. Derian to Berlin
and stating that such meetings could contribute to promoting and
developing bilateral relations. He said the GDR attaches great impor-
tance to developing relations with the US; in that connection he noted
with satisfaction President Carter’s comments about the US interests
in developing relations during the presentation of credentials by
Ambassador Grunert on October 2.2 We have made progress in past
years, Nier stated, but not all possibilities in the bilateral field have
been exhausted. The development of US–GDR relations will contribute
to detente and peace and security in Europe.
4. Ms. Derian replied, stating that the US shared many of these
same values—we are making progress in the development of our
relations and noted President Carter’s expressed interest in developing
these relations. Ms. Derian said that she had a new task to fulfill in
the State Department in her present capacity; there are many misunder-
standings about this US human rights policy. She said that it might be
well to note first of all what US human rights policy does not mean:
It is not directed at any government or type of government. We are
concerned with human rights because the United States is a signatory
of the UN Charter, the Declaration of Human Rights, and the Helsinki
Final Act, and because American values must be reflected in US
foreign policy.
5. Ms. Derian stated that we have held discussions with all countries
[with] which we have diplomatic relations, such talks were always
held in the strictest confidence. Only in one instance had there been a
breach of confidence, and that had not come from the US side. Ms.
Derian stated that the US recognizes that the issues involved are delicate
and complex, there will always be difficulties. She noted that the US
has problems at home, citing such examples as unemployment, appear-
ance of injustice (Wilmington Ten). She stated that she would be inter-
ested in any GDR views on the situation in the US. The US human
rights policy stems from the American people and it is vitally important
to have a clear understanding in all countries of our basic policy. This
policy is complex in application. The central theme is simple: it is based
on honest humanitarian concerns; it is just what it claims to be. It is
2 After Grunert presented his credentials on October 2 at the White House, Carter
expressed his support for finalizing a Consular Convention and with the German Demo-
cratic Republic and mentioned the issue of the flow of narcotics from East Berlin to the
West, stressing his interest in cooperating on the issue. (Telegram 250621 to East Berlin,

German Democratic Republic
not an interference with detente and we have no intention of misusing
this policy.
6. Turning to US–GDR bilateral relations, Asst Sec Derian stated
that we have a hopeful feeling and that we share Nier’s expressed
views. She noted developments in the cultural field, meetings between
Foreign Minister Fischer and Secretary Vance, and the recent meeting
between President Carter and Ambassador Grunert. Ms. Derian stated
that she is pleased with the progress on divided families, adding we
need to speed up the process so that in emergency cases these can be
resolved more quickly.
7. Nier expressed thanks for Ms. Derian’s comments. He stated
that when the representatives of two governments sit at the same table,
they must operate on the basis of principles which govern the relations
between governments. One must distinguish in this connection
between internal questions and international questions. The Helsinki
Final Act constitutes an important basis for these relations: it contains a
number of norms which guide relations between nations with different
social systems, including respect for the sovereignty of nations and
non-interference, including in the matter of human rights. The GDR
considers the Final Act as a unified whole, and treats it as such. The
aims and results of the Final Act should be to ensure peace and detente
and to guarantee security of nations. The Final Act must be treated as
a whole and as the basis for bilateral relations.
8. Nier stated that human rights are embodied in the laws and
other documents of the GDR. The principal human right is the right
to peace. If peace is not secured, then the other rights have no value.
Such questions as the right to work, equality of women, minority rights
are of course important in daily life. “Some circles,” Nier continued,
argue that the US has declared human rights as the only guideline for
its foreign policy without taking other factors into consideration. This
could result in one country defining what is just and unjust. That is a
matter for each nation’s own decision. As soon as it relates to relations
between two countries, then the suspicion will be raised that you are
attempting to interfere in the internal affairs of other countries, and
this is not in the spirit of the Final Act. This could only lead to a
situation which would threaten detente. The yardstick for measuring
performance must be determined in each country. An essential element
of human rights is peaceful coexistence among nations.
9. Nier stated that the GDR’s relations with other countries does
not depend on whether there is unemployment in the other country
or whether someone has been convicted. That does not mean, he said,
that the GDR is indifferent to such problems, only that it is an internal
matter and intervention on such matters is inadmissable. The situation
is different of course, he continued, in cases where there are massive

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
violations of human rights such as Chile, Nicaragua, South Africa, and
other countries (Ms. Derian added Argentina to the list), and these
cases violate concrete provisions of the UN Charter, the Human Rights
Declaration and other documents, and it is a vital concern for other
nations to take joint actions to insure that human rights are protected.
10. Ms. Derian stated that she finds the remarks of Mr. Nier very
interesting. On the question of peace, she stated that technology had
made our world very small and that we must all strive for peace. We
need good communications and understanding among nations and
that is why we are pleased to be able to discuss an important aspect
of our policy, one about which there is misunderstanding. Ms. Derian
stated that human rights is not the only policy of the United States, it
would be naive and arrogant if a country should base its policy on a
single concept. It would also be arrogant for a nation to believe that
it alone had the knowledge and ability to discuss issues relating to
human rights. That would mean that such a country had no right at
all. Such a policy would be suspect and dangerous. The world has
grown so small, people move so much today and ideas flow from one
country to another, that all nations are bound together through trade,
marriage, etc. We must consequently talk about human problems as
well as those relating to commercial, political and military issues. We
now have the framework in which we can discuss these problems
without anger or rancor.
11. Nier replied that he could agree with many of the points Ms.
Derian had made, it is a small world and because of technological,
economic and other developments, countries cannot exist by them-
selves and cooperation is necessary. Just because of the close intercon-
nection of nations, it is especially important to exercise the utmost
caution in relations among peoples. It is necessary to take into consider-
ation national differences and the rules that govern relations between
governments and peoples. We must be able to discuss these points
without giving offense to one another. We wish to be able to live
with nations with different systems. So long as there are nations with
different systems, we must try to live with one another.
12. Ms. Derian replied that this had nothing to do with human
rights: The GDR has its system, the US its own. Nier responded that
it is not sufficient only to take note of different systems but also to
respect them. We must take into account that each nation has a right
to self-determination.
13. Ms. Derian noted that in preparing to come to East Berlin, she
had been informed that the constitutions of the US and the GDR contain
many of the same provisions. She noted that she had become somewhat
of an expert on aspects of the Argentine constitution and this provides
for more rights than the constitution of either the GDR or the US. Nier

German Democratic Republic
observed that there is a difference between a constitution reality. Ms.
Derian continued that the point is all govts recognize the need for these
statements.
14. Ms. Derian referred to Nier’s distinction between internal mat-
ters and external matters and gave the example of a neighborhood in
which everyone kept a neat garden in front of their house. She stated
that if someone wanted to keep goats in their garden, or dump their
garbage there, the people in the neighborhood would have to get
together and talk about the problem peacefully. Nier replied that
relations between nations are not the same as relations among neigh-
bors. However, accepting Ms. Derian’s vivid example, Nier said that
the GDR tries to keep its own garden neat, but that if its neighbor
wants to raise goats in his garden or dump garbage in it, that is none
of the GDR’s business. Ms. Derian said that he should know that goats
will go into the next garden to which Nier replied then they would
have to build a wall.
15. Nier at this stage changed the subject and said he would like
to raise some bilateral issues in connection with some questions raised
by the Ambassador in his September 19 meeting with Foreign Minister
Fischer.3 Ms. Derian might also find his comments of interest: Narcotics
problems—Nier stated that the GDR has no narcotics problem of its
own and it was up to the US to judge whether it had one. He stated
that the GDR is ready to cooperate in this area and is prepared to
exchange information. Experts in the Ministry of Health are prepared
to discuss these matters with US experts. Ms. Derian noted that Con-
gressman English was planning to visit East Berlin to discuss these
matters.4 Nier replied that his government had nothing against this.
Consular Convention—Nier stated that he would only like to recall
the remarks Foreign Minister Fischer had made to the Ambassador
and that Grunert had made to President Carter on this question: The
GDR is in favor of concluding a Consular Convention with the US.
The GDR’s interest and willingness to sign such an agreement has been
demonstrated through the several compromise proposals that it had
made. “We have gone to the limit of what is possible.” In order for
advised Fischer of White House and congressional interest in drug trafficking from East
Berlin. Other issues discussed included cultural exchanges, the visit of Assistant Secretary
Derian, the Consular Convention, trade, and the settlement of claims. (National Archives,
4 During his November 14 visit to East Berlin, English stressed the importance
Congress and the administration placed on stopping drug trafficking and pressed the
East Germans on establishing an informal information exchange on known traffickers.
Policy File, D780473–0704)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
there to be any progress, Nier stated, we should not have proposals
merely turned down with no counterproposals. “If the US side has
any proposals of its own, we are prepared to consider them.”5 Claims—
Nier began by noting that it was not the GDR’s fault that it had taken
30 years from the end of WWII to begin discussing these problems. The
GDR experts had considered this matter, he continued, and Professor
Kleier, the Chief of the Office for the Protection of Property, is prepared
to continue the talks with US experts at the end of January or the
beginning of February 1979. Culture—Nier stated that cultural relations
between the US and GDR had developed favorably. Ms. Derian noted
the beauty of the Dresden exhibit. Nier replied that the GDR could not
send such an exhibit each year but was pleased at the good reception
the exhibit had had. Nier noted that the Ambassador had made several
suggestions for cultural activities. He agreed to the performances of
the Jubilee Singers for May 1979 and also at the Dresden Music Festival
and in Karl Marx Stadt. He said preparation was underway for the
exhibition of “Reflections USA” in Leipzig in the fall of 1979 and that
they would view “positively” having “Reflections” exhibited at the TV
Tower in Berlin in 1980 but that they needed detailed proposals. In
conclusion, he said that there are new possibilities for developing
relations between the GDR and the US.
16. The Ambassador stated that the presence of Asst Sec Derian
was an indication of our interest in developing better understanding
and cooperation with the GDR in a bilateral and in a CSCE context.
He stated that such consultations can lead to better understanding,
point up problems, identify common interest which can contribute
to bilateral cooperation, peace and security. Ambassador expressed
appreciation for the responses to questions he had raised with Foreign
Minister Fischer. He noted in particular the offer of cooperation in
narcotics control, the importance of this issue had been highlighted by
the fact that the President had raised it during the presentation of
credentials of Ambassador Grunert. We are pleased about GDR willing-
ness to receive Congressman English as this could contribute to solving
the drug problem and to development of bilateral relations as well.
On the Consular Convention question, the Ambassador acknowledged
that this is one of the unresolved issues impeding the normalization
5 Meeting with East German officials in East Berlin on June 16, Woessner stressed that
including a definition of nationality in the Consular Convention “caused us difficulties
not only in and of itself, but also because of the question it raised concerning Berlin.”
The East Germans responded that a Consular Convention could only be signed when
“both parties recognized that both have citizens and could represent their interests.”
(National Archives, RG 59, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Office of Analysis for

German Democratic Republic
of relations. He said the US appreciates the GDR’s positive approach
to this problem and stated that the US would continue to study the
problem and would “go back to the drawing board.” He added that
with good will and determination it should be possible to resolve the
nationality question, preferably without referring to it at all in any
exchange of letters.
17. The Ambassador stated that the claims issues are important to
us and their solution would contribute to bilateral relations. The US
had positively assessed the March meeting of experts, the Foreign
Claims Settlement Commission is working within a short time frame
and negotiations should start in 1980. Ambassador said that he would
convey the offer of a meeting to hold talks to authorities in Washington
but, as an informal comment, expressed the hope that these talks could
be held earlier. The Ambassador agreed that bilateral cultural relations
had broadened and deepened, and he expressed appreciation for the
fact that the Jubilee Singers would be able to perform in May next
year. He expressed the hope that the photographic exhibit, “Reflections,
USA” could be held in the Berlin TV Tower as well.
18. Nier said that he wanted to make a comment in the support
of frankness that had so far prevailed. He stated that one must not
give an opportunity to the mass media to poison the “constructive
atmosphere” which had prevailed during the talks. This would not
serve either detente or the solution of problems. Nier noted that there
had been some speculation in the mass media and that the GDR had
had experience with abuse of this nature. He stated that he had no
objection to informing the media of the fact that the US and the GDR
had discussed matters of mutual interest. Ms. Derian stated that if she
is obliged to make any statement to the press at all, it is to the effect
that she had had frank discussions on matters of mutual interest. Ms.
Derian stated that as we prepare for the Madrid Conference, we must
talk and that such discussions can ease tensions. Nier replied that the
GDR was prepared to contribute to the preparations and hopes to find
useful ways to develop cooperation among nations. He noted that he
had just returned from Madrid and the Spanish Government had
already started its preparations for the conference. In conclusion, Dep-
uty Foreign Minister Nier expressed the hope that Assist Sec Derian
could come back to Berlin when the weather was better.
19. Cable has been cleared in draft by Ms. Derian.
Bolen

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
124.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
the German Democratic Republic1
17173. Subject: U.S. Goals and Objectives in the GDR. Ref: (A) 78
1. (S-entire text) Summary: The GDR Interagency Group met Janu-
ary 9 to assess the present state of our relations with the GDR and to
consider the statement of U.S. goals and objectives in the GDR submit-
ted by the Embassy (ref A). This cable contains a report of the general
policy discussion, which centered on the pace of the development of
our relations, the maneuverability of the GDR vis-a-vis the Soviet Union
and CEMA, the value of and prospects for trade, GDR activities in
Africa, and the paucity of our knowledge about East German society.
It was agreed to continue the present measured pace of our relations,
with a slight increase in cultural and exchange activity aimed at increas-
ing the “transparency” of East German society. It was also agreed that
further movement in the trade and cultural areas would be possible
after the conclusion of a Consular Convention, the prospects for which
appear improved. The Embassy-submitted goals and objectives state-
ment was approved with some modifications. The revised, interagency
approved goals and objectives statement, the format for which was
revised January 17, will be sent septel. End summary.
2. Deputy Assistant Secretary Goodby, who chaired the meeting,
opened by commending the Embassy for its excellent goals and objec-
tives submission (ref A) and outlining the current state of US–GDR
relations and the prospects for their development. Berlin, he said,
remained the key albeit unspoken factor in those relations. Other impor-
tant factors are our concerns for security and stability in Central Europe
and for humanitarian improvements within the GDR. There are no
immediate prospects for MFN, but, even in its absence, there should
be a modest growth of trade. Following a Consular Convention, for
Secret. Drafted by Gray; cleared by Larrabee, Kaplan, Brown, and in HA, EUR, L/EUR,
INR, H/EUR, EB, DOD, ICA, CIA, DOE, Agriculture, Treasury, and the FBI; approved
by Goodby. Sent for information to Bonn, Budapest, Bucharest, Belgrade, Moscow,
Prague, Sofia, West Berlin, and USNATO.
U.S. goals and objectives in the German Democratic Republic for the 1981 fiscal year.
cabled instructions for updating the posts’ goals and objectives statements for the 1981

German Democratic Republic
which there was now some hope, we might take some small further
steps such as granting permission for new GDR Trade Offices in New
York and an expansion of cultural relations. Our general stance, he
said, has been to maintain a low profile, with some maintaining that
the less we do with the GDR the better. Others such as the Embassy,
however, have argued for a more activist policy, a position supported
by even some West Germans.
3. Noting that our relations with the GDR were marginal compared
to those with the FRG, Woessner (EUR/CE) advised that we continue
to proceed slowly with the GDR, taking one step at a time, the Consular
Convention being the first. This did not have to mean, he added, that
we ignore the GDR or present it with a hostile face.
4. Brown (EUR/SOV) asked how rapidly the GDR wished to pro-
ceed with the relationship. Woessner replied that the GDR wants to
move very rapidly, the motivating drive being the desire for increased
access to Western trade and technology. He was not persuaded, how-
ever, that the GDR’s aspirations in this regard were realistic. Gray
(EUR/CE) postulated that, through a slight westward shift of its trade
patterns, the GDR might also be seeking greater maneuverability vis-
a-vis the Soviet Union, particularly greater satisfaction in the economic
sphere of its own national interests. Goodby added that this was pre-
cisely the impression he had gotten from GDR Foreign Trade State
Secretary Beil and from certain West Germans. Kaplan (S/P) interjected
that such maneuverability was illusory and, to the extent that it was
achieved, might not always be in directions compatible with U.S. inter-
ests. The key factors inhibiting maneuverability for the GDR were, he
added, the central importance of the GDR for Moscow’s policy toward
Germany and Central Europe, the GDR’s paranoia about possible
“infection” from the West and the fact that the Soviets, who fear the
development of a “quadrilateral entente” (the US, Europe, Japan and
China), are more fearful than ever about Germany on its Western flank.
However exaggerated these Soviet and the GDR fears, they render
prospects for East German maneuverability marginal. Noting that these
margins are important, Barkley (EUR/CE) said it might be wise to
engage the GDR, if only to test how fast and how far the GDR wants
and is able to go. Greenwald (HA) added that another contributing
factor to an increased opening to the West by the GDR might be its
continued desire for increased political legitimacy and respectability.
Such increased legitimacy for the GDR, Brown suggested might be one
reason why the Soviets might allow the GDR greater leeway vis-a-vis
the non-FRG West. Others include trade, a preoccupation with China,
and a desire to lessen the GDR’s dependence on the FRG.
5. Concluding on the basis of the foregoing discussion that it
appeared that the FRG, the Soviets and the GDR wanted to move the

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
US–GDR relationship forward, Goodby asked why the US did not want
to do so. Is there nothing in such forward movement for us but trade?
Neets (Agriculture) replied that, while the GDR agricultural market is
not great, it is active and capable of growth and currently represents
the largest part of US trade with the GDR. Asked by Woessner how
close we were to reaching the growth limits of that market, he said
that, while we have made great strides, it will be more difficult to
obtain a larger share as long as the Soviets continue their present levels
of supply. Porter (Commerce) noted that overall trade turnover had
increased an estimated 15 percent over 1977, with a sharp increase in
The GDR, she concluded is learning more about the US market, while
the quality of GDR goods is becoming better known to American firms.
With MFN, trade would probably expand significantly, with more
turn-key contracts going to the US. Most of these contracts would
otherwise go to other countries in the West. By way of example, she
pointed to the estimated $300–400 million in GDR business that cur-
rently goes to US offshore subsidiaries each year. In this regard, Woes-
sner noted that the British and French had long competed fiercely for
the GDR market, divorcing such competition from political considera-
tions. Touching briefly on the GDR’s indebtedness, Goodby asked if
we could do a study of the question. Gray replied that indebtedness
is supposed to be discussed in an ongoing CIA study of the GDR
economy. He said he would check on the status of that study.
6. Turning to a consideration of the GDR as a CEMA/Warsaw Pact
member, Goodby noted that not all the cards were in the Soviets’
hands. Larrabee (NSC) added that the GDR’s importance to the Soviet
Union stemmed primarily from its security role. While the GDR is also
of great economic importance to the East, over the last few years there
had been a decline in its trade with CEMA, though there were recent
signs that the GDR was making efforts to try to reverse this trend.
With regard to foreign policy, he detected few meaningful signs of
East German independence, except at times in relations with the FRG.
Farlow (INR) agreed, saying it was hard to accept the assumption that
the GDR enjoyed any meaningful independence or was any more liberal
than most other East European countries. The GDR, he added, tends
to act on two foreign policy levels. Publicly, the GDR’s leaders tend to
take milder, less polemical positions than they do in private discussions
with their allies. Their position on China, he said, was a good example,
being more restrained in major public pronouncements compared to
some other East European statements, but more outspoken in less
publicized allied discussions—as during the recent Sofia Ideological
Conference of Communist Parties. Gray noted, however, that the GDR
was in the forefront of those publicly backing Vietnam and that the

German Democratic Republic
GDR press had carried a number of East German-authored diatribes
against Chinese. He also noted that others like Hungary had adopted
a rather slavish pro-Moscow foreign policy line, while pursuing their
own national interests.
7. Porter observed that, as its most advanced member, the GDR is
an important technology supplier to CEMA. For this reason alone, the
Soviet Union would not allow the strained economic fabric of the GDR
to tear. The GDR, however, has been finding it harder to obtain raw
materials from CEMA and to meet contracts for finished products. This
was producing greater tension in the relationship. Kaplan added that
the “resentment factor” should not be underestimated. Eastern Europe-
ans resent the GDR, because it is CEMA’s richest member, it is the
only one to enjoy it and, most importantly in their eyes, it is German.
Gray agreed but observed that resentment worked both ways, with East
Germans recalling the nature of the Soviets’ arrival in and occupation
of East Germany and probably feeling that their economy could
advance far more rapidly if not linked to that of the Soviet Union.
For the latter reason there is probably a desire among even the SED
leadership to eke out more independence in the economic sphere.
Blacklin (DOE) noted that resentment by its other CEMA partners
tended to force the GDR to rely more heavily on the Soviet Union.
CEMA in general, he added, is experiencing problems in obtaining
needed energy resources, and the GDR, with only lignite, is particularly
vulnerable. This, he said, has created opportunities for Western
sourcing.
8. Noting that it has been nearly impossible to determine whether
particular disturbances in and around Berlin have been undertaken as
a result of Soviet or GDR instigation, Woessner observed nevertheless
that Berlin provided a peculiar, particularly strong bond between the
Soviets and the East Germans. Kaplan agreed, but doubted whether
the Soviets allowed the GDR much independent play on Berlin. The
way to deal with Berlin problems is with Moscow, not the GDR.
9. Greenwald said that, toward the end of internal liberalization, we
should make a greater effort to open up East German society through
exchanges and wider distribution of Western publications. Larrabee
added that there were other reasons for trying to increase the transpar-
ency or porosity of GDR society, not the least of which were to keep
open a Western option for the GDR and to improve our very imperfect
knowledge of the GDR. Neets said that there was already sufficient
knowledge about the GDR, most of it readily available in the FRG.
That, according to Gray, was part of our problem; namely that most
of our knowledge about the GDR came to us filtered through West
German perceptions. Our own direct study of the GDR is limited
because most academic observers of Eastern European Communist

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
affairs are Slavicists who tend to ignore the GDR. It would be well, he
said, to encourage exchanges that would foster American expertise in
East German affairs. Larrabee agreed, and said it should be possible
to upgrade our activities in this area within the limits of PD–21. Milton
(ICA) added, however, that our presentations and exchanges programs
had grown satisfactorily without a cultural agreement. Since such an
agreement could later be used to limit our activities in the GDR, ICA
would prefer to avoid signing one, unless it were demonstrated that
we had reached the limits of growth in the absence of an agreement.
All agreed.
10. Responding to Goodby’s request for a discussion of GDR activi-
ties in Africa, Larrabee suggested that, while the GDR has interests of
its own in Africa, in the military-security sphere the GDR often appears
to be acting as a Soviet surrogate and that the way to moderate its
activities there is through the Soviet Union. Goodby said that the GDR
was in Africa not only as a Soviet surrogate and that its military activi-
ties, restricted so far to advisors, have not been great. The ORPA/EE
rep agreed that the surrogate role had been overplayed and reported
that only small numbers of GDR military personnel have been detected
in Africa. The ORPA/EE rep added that the GDR, which had long
pursued its own interests in Africa, is also trying to develop the conti-
nent as a market. Farlow (INR) said that what was significant was not
that the East Germans had been in Africa for a long time but that their
[interests] correlated with and reinforced Soviet interests. A division
of labor with the Soviets was evident, with GDR military aid down
and economic aid up in 1978. Suggesting possible GDR support for
terrorists, he said that we should monitor East German activities
throughout the Third World, urging moderation when necessary. All
agreed that this “monitor/moderate” formula was preferable to a neu-
tral dialogue that could be interpreted as acceptance or even approval
of an East German presence in Africa or elsewhere in the Third World.
Vance

German Democratic Republic
125.
Memorandum of Conversation1
SUBJECT
US–GDR Relations
PARTICIPANTS
The Deputy Secretary
David B. Bolen, Ambassador to the GDR
David K. Edminster, Deputy Director, EUR/CE
The Deputy Secretary opened the conversation by asking Ambassa-
dor Bolen to summarize his hopes for the US–GDR relationship and
discuss the problems in that relationship.2
Ambassador Bolen said there were obvious problems stemming
from the long period when the two countries had no relations with
each other: there was still a certain residue of negativism on both sides.
Despite this, he had good access to the GDR leadership and we are
able to talk frankly with them, even on the political level. He mentioned
in this connection Ms. Derian’s having been received by the GDR3—a
thing which had surprised some people.
For the future, the Ambassador thought we had significant oppor-
tunities to expand our relations with the GDR in ways which would
help us to realize some of our objectives there with regard to: e.g.,
GDR behavior with respect to Berlin, Africa and the Middle East;
human rights; cooperation in narcotics matters. The Ambassador was
convinced that neither the Soviets nor the FRG had any serious objec-
tion to an expansion of US–GDR relations; he mentioned in this connec-
tion his conversations with the FRG Permanent Representative to the
GDR, Gaus, who had assured Ambassador Bolen that he saw no prob-
lems from the standpoint of his government.4
With regard to the Consular Convention, Ambassador Bolen com-
mented that we had achieved a breakthrough following his meeting
Analysis for the Commonwealth and Eastern Europe, Office Subject Files, 1967–1985,
by Bolen; approved by Trattner. The meeting took place in the Deputy Secretary’s office.
2 See Document 124. The Department cabled a revised text to the Embassy on
from East Berlin, February 6. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
3 See Document 123.
4 No record of the meeting was found

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
of January 22 with Hermann Axen,5 which had resulted in Ambas-
sador Grunert’s presentation of new language on the nationality issue
which was acceptable to us, the UK, and the FRG, but which was still
causing problems for the French.6 The Ambassador thought that if we
could not bring the French around in the near future the only sensible
alternative was to break the linkage we had hitherto maintained
between the conclusion of the Consular Convention and the develop-
ment of US–GDR relations in other areas.
With regard to MFN, Ambassador Bolen said he was not arguing
that we should necessarily grant it to the GDR now but that we ought
not to reply to this primary GDR concern with a categorical no; we
ought to make them understand that their actions on various issues in
which we are interested, including human rights matters and claims,
could have a positive influence on the prospects for MFN.
Mr. Christopher observed that, while the GDR was perhaps doing
as much as it could, its present performance could not match the Soviet
record. Jackson-Vanik was pretty specific. We did not expect any repeal
of it but we did think that we could find ways of bringing China and
the USSR through it. The GDR, however, could not match up on the
basis of general performance and certainly not if one included their
record on emigration in the equation.
sation with SED Politburo Secretary Hermann Axen. During the conversation, Axen
stressed the need to improve economic and cultural relations between the two countries
and that “the United States must acknowledge that the GDR has citizens.” If the U.S.
Government would officially recognize that fact, Axen told the Ambassador, “we take
these few words and put them down on paper we can drink a glass to this right away.”
Bolen assured Axen that the U.S. Government “clearly recognize GDR citizenship and
that GDR Consuls have a right of access to GDR citizens” and that “there exists a basis
for resolution in the U.S. proposed mirror-image statement.” (National Archives, RG 59,
6 In late 1978, having failed to reach an agreement on issuing a statement on
nationality, the Department proposed a new solution to the issue. Dubbed the “Circle
of People” approach, the proposal sought to clarify, in mirror statements, that each
country would have access to its citizens held under arrest in the other country. Goodby
delivered the proposal to Grunert on November 3, 1978, in a tour d’horizon meeting at
to make its proposal known to the East German Government, the French representative
in the Bonn Group raised objections to the statements, suggesting that the text conferred
recognition to the East German Government of an East German nationality. Reporting
on the French concerns, Stoessel noted that the French representative also “indicated to
us privately that Paris takes a dim view of the protracted bilateral US–FRG discussions
Central Foreign Policy File, D780484–1108) The Department of State reply in telegram
unless the French bring it up. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,

German Democratic Republic
Ambassador Bolen conceded that emigration from the GDR
remained a serious problem. He thought the record had improved,
however, and cited the following figures: 1970—540 family reunifica-
there were 190 family reunification cases involving Americans. The
Embassy had made representations in 118 of those cases, 85 of which
have been resolved positively.
Mr. Christopher conceded that the record might be better than he
knew but said that he still had the impression that it was very difficult
to get out of the GDR. Ambassador Bolen stressed that he talks to the
Foreign Minister personally about humanitarian cases and leaves lists
with the Minister of cases which we wish urgently to have cleared up.
The GDR had made some effort to meet our desires on this score.
In conclusion, Mr. Christopher observed that the important thing
was that our relations with the GDR were on an upward trend—
perhaps only a very gentle rise, but upward nonetheless.
126.
Memorandum Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1
Washington, May 3, 1979
EAST GERMANY: THE CHILLY WINDS OF SPRING (U)
East Germany recently has initiated a number of repressive measures
against dissident intellectuals, some consumers, and Western correspondents.
The official pretext was unfair treatment by the Western press of such issues
as East German hard-currency shops and the quality of everyday life in East
Germany. The government’s actions were no doubt intended to address more
deep-seated problems, such as its failing ability to manipulate the populace
in support of its policies. And they were further intended to send a message
to West Germany that, detente and ostpolitik notwithstanding, East Germany
has no intention of modifying its foreign and domestic policies. The government
probably felt the need to send such a message to the West because of recent
speculation in the Western press, fueled in part by the statements and travels
of West German Social Democratic parliamentary leader Herbert Wehner,
Confidential. The memorandum was prepared in the Office of Political Analysis and
coordinated within OPA and the Office of Economic Research. Copies were sent to the
NSC, the Department of State’s INR and EUR Bureaus, and the Departments of the
Treasury and Defense.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
that a process of German reunification may be in its infancy. [classification
not declassified]
The Regime’s Measures
East Germany now requires that its citizens convert hard currency
into bank certificates before these funds can be used to purchase quality
goods in special shops (Intershops). The change acknowledges that the
two-currency economy that has developed in East Germany, with the
West German mark being the preferred currency, had to be curtailed.
The dual-currency system makes special benefits available to those
who can acquire foreign funds—many times through transactions out-
side the official economy. The persons thus rewarded by the system
are, by and large, not those the regime wishes to be rewarded—workers
and party and government officials. The change in the system was not
as restrictive as many East Germans feared, but it will bring home to
those who profit from the dual system that the privileges they enjoy
are strictly at the sufferance of the regime. [classification not declassified]
The new measures are designed to reduce the growing number of
informal contacts between East and West Germans. The West German
media, which reaches a substantial number of East Germans through
radio and television broadcasts, has long been a nuisance to the authori-
ties because of their accurate descriptions, collected from local residents,
of economic, social and political conditions in East Germany. To reduce
these contacts, the regime has enacted controls requiring Western jour-
nalists to provide the authorities 24 hours notice and a detailed itinerary
of travel plans outside East Berlin. Other restrictions include a ban on
interviews with East German citizens without prior government
approvalandarequirementthat,“incarryingouttheirjournalisticwork,
journalists must abstain from slandering or defaming the GDR, its state
organs, and its leading figures, as well as states allied with the GDR.”
These restrictions are more severe than those of any other East European
state, including the Soviet Union. [classification not declassified]
The restrictions on foreign travel by dissidents have prevented
several regime critics, including East Germany’s most prominent
author, Stefan Heym, from traveling to West Germany to attend lectures
and conferences. The government also has devised a new legal scheme,
apparently to be applied on a selective basis, for punishing authors
who publish their work in the West. According to this newly devised
legal principle, a citizen who publishes in the West and receives com-
pensation is guilty of violating foreign currency regulations, the penalty
for which is a 10 year prison term. This law probably is the basis of
the recently instituted criminal proceedings against Robert Havemann,
a prominent critic. The measures against dissidents will not halt their
activities or the feed-back of information into the country about them,
but they will have an inhibiting effect. [classification not declassified]

German Democratic Republic
The Timing
There are probably several reasons why the regime chose to act at
this time, despite the risk to its efforts to expand economic ties with the
West. Attheroot isits determination tomaintainits identity asa separate
German state capable of controlling its internal affairs. The regime may
have believed that this had to be emphasized at this time to the West
Germans, whose ostpolitik is credited by some for the conditions the East
Germans find uncomfortable. Inter-German intercourse has increased at
the economic and personal level to a point where some West German
quarters could speculate last month about the possibility of eventual
German reunification. Such speculation is intolerable to the regime,
which this year will celebrate the 30th anniversary of the creation of the
East German state, because it raises the fundamental question of the per-
manence of that state and, thus, the obligation of its citizens to give it
their allegiance. [classification not declassified]
The measures were, no doubt, cleared with the USSR, which has
ruled out German reunification. The political concessions made by East
Germany to the West—and West Germans, in particular—in the 1970s
have, in part, been in support of the USSR’s policy of detente with the
West and improved relations with West Germany. The USSR may not
be loath to see speculation on the reunification question because it empha-
sizes to the East German leaders—and to the Poles—their ultimate reli-
ance on the USSR for the perpetuation and integrity of their state, and,
thus, their obligation to follow Soviet dictates. But the Soviets would not
wish reunification to become a credible notion in East Germany, where
it strikes a responsive chord with the public and, perhaps, even with
some in the bureaucracy. The Soviets could even have been responsible
for the timing of the East German moves. [classification not declassified]
A further impetus for instituting repressive measures now is the
country’s deteriorating economic situation. Faced with a serious balance
of payments problem with the West,the regime has critical resource allo-
cation decisions to make, and the result could be a conscious reduction
of economic growth, with all that would mean in terms of greater auster-
ityforthepublic.Thiscouldleadtoapartialabandonmentoftheregime’s
consumer-oriented policy, which has been the basic theme of its appeals
forpopularsupport. Beforesuchareversalbecameobvious tothepublic,
the regime would presumably wish to remind the people of the powers
of the state to enforce public discipline.2 [classification not declassified]
2 According to a sources list, the memorandum was based on the following tele-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
127.
Memorandum of Conversation1
PARTICIPANTS
Dr. Kurt Nier, GDR Deputy Foreign Minister
Patt Derian, Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights and Humanitarian
Affairs
ALSO PRESENT
Ambassador Grunert, GDR Ambassador to U.S.
Ambassador Bolen, U.S. Ambassador to GDR
Joachim Elm, Planning Staff, GDR Foreign Office, Berlin
GDR Interpreter (nu)
Gisela Marcuse, Language Services
Jonathan Greenwald, HA/HR (Notetaker)
SUBJECT
Human Rights Questions including CSCE, Divided Families, GDR Restrictions
on Journalists and Dissidents, GDR Educational Policy, Jewish Claims
Ms. Derian and Dr. Nier expressed pleasure at seeing each other
again so soon after their discussions in Berlin in October.2 Dr. Nier said
that he had spent the morning in consultations with U.S. representa-
tives, headed by Deputy Assistant Secretary Goodby, on many ques-
tions important to bilateral relations.3 He could say that in some areas
we have come forward a step. The Consular Convention has visibly
neared conclusion. Ms. Derian expressed satisfaction.
Dr. Nier said that a further step has thus been taken that can
produce a positive effect upon other areas. The agenda had not yet
been completed. There would be a chance to continue with Mr. Goodby
the following day.4 His program also called for meetings with other
figures in the Department and the Executive Branch and the Congress.
It was an intensive program but one that he welcomed because he
hoped and was persuaded that it would produce not just an exchange
of views, but also concrete results.
Confidential. Drafted by Greenwald on May 9. The meeting took place in Derian’s office.
2 See Document 123.
during their meeting the previous day, Nier told Goodby that the German Democratic
Republic agreed with the April 16 U.S. proposal on the nationality issue in the Consular
4 See Document 129.

German Democratic Republic
Ms. Derian said that she had tried during the conversation in Berlin
to lay the groundwork for an understanding of U.S. human rights
policy, in particular for an understanding of why development of bilat-
eral relations required that account be taken of that policy. She had
sought then to keep the discussion general. Today she would like to
speak more specifically.
Ms. Derian said she knew that Mr. Goodby had passed over a copy
of our divided families’ representation list. It was a smaller list than
we have with some other countries, but it is very important for the
people involved. The U.S. has also talked with the GDR about measures
for expediting the handling of emergency visitation cases. This is one
of the first things we raise because it is so important for the families.
Ms. Derian said she was sure Ambassador Grunert had called atten-
tion to the wide reporting in the press of the new restrictions the GDR
had recently placed on journalists. These restrictions had come as a
surprise to the U.S. They were inconsistent with CSCE since they
involve more restriction on the free exchange of ideas. This type of
thing, when coupled with the new restrictions placed on Havemann
and Heym, creates great interest in the U.S. Together they are serious
barriers to the development of our relations. We hear about them from
members of Congress and from the public. These steps give rise to an
impression that things are not going well between our two states, that
the CSCE Final Act is not being implemented. Thus tensions grow
when things appeared to be going along well between our countries,
just at the time of such an important and positive step as the Consular
Convention.
Ms. Derian said she wanted also to ask a question with regard to
Jewish claims. She understood that the private American concerned
with this question, Benjamin Ferencz, had proposed that the GDR
export goods to the U.S. with the proceeds earmarked for compensa-
tion. She wondered how the GDR would react to this idea. She asked
this question somewhat out of the context of the rest of her remarks
because she understood that Mr. Ferencz may have some Congressional
interest in special legislation to facilitate this but does not wish to
pursue the idea unless there was GDR interest. She realized it was not
possible for Dr. Nier to answer this question immediately, but she
hoped he would think it over. If the idea appears interesting to the
GDR, Mr. Ferencz could be advised.
Ms. Derian said the last topic she wished to raise concerned military
education in the schools. There was growing concern that part of the
curriculum appears to deal with attitudes toward the West, that the
teaching promotes hatred for the West among young people. This is
out of step with CSCE. She wondered whether there was a reason for
this. On one hand, the GDR seeks to improve relations; on the other

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
hand, children are taught hatred. This along with her points about
journalists, Havemann and Heym were what she wished to convey.
She said she had heard that Havemann’s wife and six-year old daughter
were subjected to tight controls; Heym could not travel out of the
country. These are unusual and unexpected measures that create ten-
sions. She would appreciate an explanation.
Dr. Nier said he would have to begin with a clarification of what are
properly questions relating to bilateral relations and what are internal
matters and therefore not appropriate to bilateral discussions. He had
explained the basic GDR position on Helsinki Final Act implementation
in Berlin and again this morning. The GDR does not consider that
the Final Act deals only with family reunification or humanitarian
cooperation. It has three baskets, and success in further implementation
is only possible if the Final Act is considered in its entirety. Overall
there are many positive results. There can be no doubt that the GDR
is prepared to continue along the way of implementation in cooperation
with other participating states, but there will always be the need to
keep all aspects of the Final Act in mind.
Dr. Nier said he had also explained the GDR’s fundamental position
on human rights in Berlin. Nothing has changed or can change in
this position. He had already spoken to one question, that of family
reunification, this morning. He had referred to the GDR’s regular prac-
tice with the U.S., which was a generous one. More than 100 cases had
been resolved. Other cases are under review and will be decided on
the basis of GDR laws and regulations. He had to mention that GDR
citizens, GDR laws, and internal GDR affairs were involved. But there
was no basis to doubt the GDR’s generous practice in this area.
Dr. Nier said he had also discussed the competence of foreign
journalists in the morning. The new regulations were fully in accord-
ance with the Final Act. Every state has the right to enact its own laws
and to safeguard its own interests in so far as there is no conflict
with international law. Every state, the GDR included, has the right to
prevent any interference in its internal affairs. The GDR knows how
to exercise this right. Foreign correspondents are afforded every oppor-
tunity to do their work and to engage in objective reporting. So long
as they act in a professional and serious manner and comply with their
Helsinki Final Act obligations, they will be given every support and
opportunity to do serious reporting. There were individuals, however,
who tried to abuse their work for interference in internal affairs. They
will be prevented from doing so because the GDR knows how to protect
its interests, as do all states. He said that an important part of the
Final Act is the recognition that noninterference in internal affairs is
recognized as one of the leading principles that should guide relations
between states. He repeated that there was no reason to express concern

German Democratic Republic
about the regulations. A serious, professional correspondent who acts
in the spirit of the Final Act to promote understanding, peace and
friendship, has received in the past and will receive in the future all
necessary support.
Dr. Nier said that two questions had been asked that could not be
discussed. He had in mind what had been said about Havemann, Heym
and education. These were matters fully within the internal competence
of the GDR. They involved domestic laws. The GDR did not concede
anyone else the right to say anything about them. The GDR was not in
agreement with much that happened in other countries. To the extent
that those events were based on internal legislation, however, the GDR
would not interfere. If someone violates laws in a country, this can not
be discussed by other countries. The GDR, for example, was concerned
that in some countries children do not enjoy the full right to education,
vocational training, and adequate career opportunities. The GDR regret-
ted this deprivation of young people’s rights, but such a matter could
not be the subject for government to government relations. The GDR
educational system enjoys international esteem. It reflects high standards
of academic excellence and is also marked by a spirit of peace, humanism
and understanding that flows from the state’s general policy.
Ms. Derian said she wished to ask a question of clarification. She
believed Dr. Nier might have answered one of her questions obliquely,
but she wished to be certain she understood. Was he saying that GDR
children are taught to have a high regard for peace and for people of
other countries and that reports we have that children are taught an
attitude of hostility are incorrect?
Dr. Nier said that if anyone alleges that GDR children are taught
hatred for children in Western countries, it is a defamation and a
slander of the GDR’s policy. The GDR’s basic educational principle is
the solidarity of youth everywhere in the world, be it Vietnam, Africa
or elsewhere. Such reports, from wherever they come, are, simply put,
a slander. He asked to be excused for his frank response.
Ms. Derian asked whether the GDR distinguished between what
children are taught about other children and what they may be taught
in a military context. Dr. Nier responded that there is simply no teaching
of hostility. All GDR education is based on love for peace, solidarity,
friendship, and understanding among peoples. Of course the GDR also
teaches that peace must be defended and secured. If there are classes in
this context in which young people are acquainted with national defense,
this has nothing to do with reports of the sort Ms. Derian had mentioned.
Dr. Nier said he would reiterate again, however, that these were
matters of internal competence. Sovereign states should base their
relations on matters that pertain to bilateral affairs in accordance with
principles contained in documents like the Final Act and the UN

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
Charter. If the objective is to develop relations, which he repeated is
what the GDR desires, they should be guided by efforts to contribute
to detente and should concentrate on such matters. He explained that
he had said in the morning that the U.S. and the GDR should act in
areas where progress is possible. This was basic to further development
of relations. There will naturally be questions on which it will not be
possible to agree, but these matters should not become obstacles to the
progress that was possible.
Ms. Derian noted that Dr. Nier had to leave momentarily for an
appointment at the Commerce Department. She felt it was important,
however, to cover two points. She said that the U.S. and the GDR have
parallel objectives. Dr. Nier had spoken twice about the Final Act being
a single entity that should not be divided up. But it is not possible to
speak at the same time about all its aspects. Issues have to be addressed
one at a time, and human rights is part of the Final Act.
Ms. Derian said that the two countries were trying to make a new
relationship. She feared she had failed to transmit the message that as
steps are taken that build that new relationship, humanitarian matters,
policies that affect people, were essential to our ability to move ahead.
She understood the GDR position, but progress in the human area was
necessary if we were to move ahead. Of course the GDR could say for
years that all of these were internal matters, but if we want to go ahead,
they must be addressed. She noted that there is a well-known board
game where players are occasionally told, “return to go”. Perhaps
relations were sometimes like that, but the U.S. wants to move ahead.
Ms. Derian said she was grateful for the opportunity to talk with
Dr. Nier again. It was frustrating just to begin and then to have to
stop. She recalled that Dr. Nier had, in the Berlin conversation, com-
mented that all countries had constitutions and seemed to discount
them as not of much significance. She asked if that were also the GDR’s
view of the Final Act.
Dr. Nier said that he had not meant to give that impression, that
the GDR’s constitution was filled with life and was not just words.
The GDR had the same feeling about the Final Act. But this could not
happen with just this or that part of the document. He believed there
had been progress in the past few years. The situation should be com-
pared with 1975 when the Final Act had been signed. The present
situation in Europe reflects forward movement between states with
different social systems. There was no reason why more progress could
not be made, but there was a need to prepare carefully and thoroughly
so that we could go forward. Ambassador Grunert spoke up and said
he would be interested in ongoing discussions.

German Democratic Republic
128.
Memorandum From Stephen Larrabee of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, May 3, 1979
SUBJECT
Attendance at Reception for GDR Deputy Foreign Minister Nier (C)
I am puzzled by the rationale behind your refusal to allow me to
attend the reception for GDR Deputy Secretary Nier. I have no great
love for the East Germans, and personally I would just as soon not go.
Professionally, however, I think I should go. (C)
—Nier is a Deputy Foreign Minister. He is here at our invitation
to put the finishing touches on a Consular Convention, which we made
a precondition for any expansion of relations, and to sign several other
bilateral accords. The GDR has accepted our compromise language on
the nationality issue. (C)
—He is seeing Mat Nimetz and I understand that Nimetz will be
at the reception. (C)
But there is a more fundamental point. Regardless of what we may
think of the GDR, it is an important actor in world affairs. It is the
ninth leading industrial power in the world and most powerful country,
militarily and economically, in Eastern Europe. At the same time, it is
part of a larger equation—the “German problem”—which has been,
and to a large extent remains, a source of instability and tension in
Europe. Its relations with the USSR and the FRG directly impact on
our relationships with both countries. And its actions affect our interests
in Berlin in important ways. (C)
Moreover, while the GDR remains strongly supportive of Mos-
cow’s politics and internally orthodox, there are signs of ferment and
change, and it would be short-sighted to underestimate their potential
impact on Central Europe over the long run. (C)
These factors give us an interest in maintaining a dialogue with
the GDR and learning more about it. We can’t do this, however, if we
shun even the most informal contact with its diplomats. I am not
suggesting that I should spend every Friday evening dining with the
DCM at the Sans Souci, but I am suggesting that I should have some
Sent for information. Copies were sent to Jennings, Bartholomew, and Dodson.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
(low-level) contact with the GDR and that there may come a point
when such contact will prove useful to us.2 (C)
Of course, I will abide by your decision and not attend the recep-
tion. I simply wanted to suggest some factors which should be taken
into consideration in the future. (C)
2 Brzezinski underlined “there may come a point when such contact will prove
useful to us” and wrote in the margin “yes, but not yet for the NSC. ZB.”
129.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassies in
the German Democratic Republic and Federal Republic of
Germany1
115852. Subject: Goodby-Nier Consultations: May 4 Developments.
1. (C) Entire text.
2. During May 4 plenary session, Deputy Assistant Secretary
Goodby and GDR Deputy Foreign Minister Nier initialled German and
English text of separate exchange of letters on Consular Convention.
Text is same as para 4 reftel2 except that final, non-substantive sentence
of one of two letters has been changed by adding new final sentence
which reads: “I am authorized to declare that your letter and this reply
constitutes an agreement between our two governments.” Three-man
U.S. team will arrive Berlin May 9 to begin negotiation of final technical
details of Consular Convention, which negotiation we hope to have
finished in time for May 17–21 visit of GDR State Foreign Trade Secre-
tary Beil. Neither side intends to publicize fact that we have discussed
Consular Convention until such time as agreement is ready for signing.
FYI: We anticipate signing in Washington. End FYI. We will give FRG
promised note at time of signing the Consular Convention and before
public announcement of signing.
3. Nier and Postmaster General Bolger signed Parcel Post Agree-
ment May 4. Agreement contains U.S. fallback language in Article 1
Confidential; Immediate. Drafted by Gray; cleared by Edminster and in INM; approved
by Vine. Sent for information to Paris, London, West Berlin, and USNATO
2 Not further identified. See footnote 3 below.

German Democratic Republic
which protects our interest with regard to Berlin. That language reads
as follows: “This agreement applies to all areas for which the Govern-
ments of the U.S. and GDR exercise postal responsibilities.”
4. On May 4 GDR Embassy gave us a note agreeing to our proposal
of April 16 for the reciprocal exemption of taxes on diplomatic proper-
ties.3 In this regard Nier was told by Goodby that we would expect
favorable treatment of requests that will be forthcoming through our
Embassy for the conversion of our leases in East Berlin from short-
term to long-term. FYI: GDR note misquoted U.S. note April 16 replac-
ing “U.S. Embassy to the GDR” with “U.S. Embassy in the GDR.” Note
was returned to GDR Embassy May 5 by Department officer who
pointed out “grammatical” error and asked that note be resubmitted
by May 7 with proper quotation of U.S. note. We have every expectation
that this will be done. End FYI.
5. Goodby told Nier that USG is now prepared to discuss a scien-
tific-cultural agreement with the GDR and gave him a copy of our
agreement with Bulgaria as our preferred model. Nier explained that
GDR prefers separate agreements but agreed to examine US model
which consists of an umbrella agreement and a detailed biennial imple-
mentation agreement. Nier was told that we would be prepared for
detailed discussion in the early fall.
6. Nier was also told that we are now prepared to approve the
GDR pending request for new trade offices in New York upon the
signature of the Consular Convention Agreement. It was proposed
that, if Consular Convention can be signed between now and May 17,
that announcement of this step could be made at the time of Beil’s visit.
The offices consist of two foreign trade enterprise offices (Unitechna,
Jenoptik) and a branch of the GDR Embassy Commercial Section. With
regard to the latter, Nier was told that, in accordance with the agreed
minute of 1974, we would expect that we would be given the option
to open an office of our own at a time and place of our choosing. Nier
did not object.
7. Nier was presented with our Double Taxation and Agricultural
Agreement with Hungary as models for such agreements with the
GDR. Nier undertook to provide us with models of the types of ship-
ping, health, legal assistance and customs agreements the GDR would
like to sign with the U.S. He was told that we would be unable to reply
definitively on a shipping agreement until such time as an overall
maritime policy study being conducted by a White House Task Force
is completed but was assured that the GDR’s views should be factored
into that study when received. Nier said that the GDR had proposed

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
Health and Customs Agreements in order to meet U.S. narcotics con-
cerns expressed in Berlin by U.S. Customs Director Corcoran and
Assistant Secretary Falco. Goodby said that we were not really inter-
ested in a Customs Agreement but would prefer to expand our narcotics
control cooperation on the current informal basis. He also said that
health matters are normally treated by us in scientific cultural agree-
ments. When Nier pointed out that a separate agreement would be
needed to satisfy the needs of the GDR’s separate Health Ministry,
Goodby promised to look carefully at the model that would be provided
by the GDR.
8. Also raised by the GDR in a perfunctory manner were MFN,
overflight rights, military attaches, fishery quotas, an agreement on the
return of cultural objects and a GDR film week in the U.S. On MFN
and fishery quotas, both sides repeated their standard positions. We
refused to discuss attaches and told Nier to expect a negative response
to the GDR’s note on overflights. He accepted this with equanimity.
He was told that, with regard to a film week, ICA has already been
in touch with the “appropriate American institution”, the American
Film Institute, which would be pleased to establish contact with the
GDR’s Cultural Attache. On the return of cultural objects, Nier pre-
sented us with a draft note, which would require the two sides to
return objects listed in an unattached annex and to “repatriate to each
other cultural property which may be found henceforward and which
has its permanent and rightful repository in the territory of one of the
two nations.” We promised to examine this proposal carefully and, in
this context, renewed our plea for the return of the Feininger paintings.
9. Nier also proposed exchanging notes agreeing to regular political
consultations at “senior levels”, stating that this could be Goodby-Nier
level. While viewing this in a dim light, we agreed to examine the
proposal. Without specifying individuals, Goodby proposed receiving
a GDR delegation this summer for CSCE consultations followed by a
political level U.S. trip to Berlin in the fall and a higher level CSCE
consultation in Berlin in the spring. Nier expressed general agreement.
10. With regard to CSCE, Goodby gave Nier a new list of divided
family cases and protested restrictions on journalists. Our protest, he
said, would be made public in President’s report to the CSCE
Commission.
11. Claims were only touched upon briefly, with Goodby turning
over copies of fifty cases mailed earlier by USFCSC and making a
strong pitch for settlement of the Jewish claims.
12. Nier met for ten minutes with Deputy Secretary Christopher,
with both assessing positively the resolution of the Consular Conven-
tion nationality issue. In other meetings, Assistant Secretary Derian
elaborated on human rights issues, Under Secretary Newsom did so

German Democratic Republic
on the Middle East and Counselor Nimetz did so on CSCE and East-
West issues.
13. French and German Embassies have been briefed in detail on
the above. U.S. Bonn group rep should do the same.
Vance
130.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassies in
the German Democratic Republic and the Federal Republic
of Germany1
168723. For Ambassador Bolen From Assistant Secretary Vest. Sub-
ject: Signing of US–GDR Consular Convention. Ref: A) Berlin 3657;
1. Confidential (Entire text)
2. For Berlin. On basis refs A and B, we have again considered
question of whether we should proceed with scheduled July 3 signing
of US–GDR Consular Convention in light of June 28 GDR action on
election of East Berlin Volkskammer deputies.5
Confidential; Niact Immediate. Drafted by Niles; cleared by Vine; approved by Vest.
Sent for information Immediate to Paris and London; and for information Priority to
Moscow and USNATO.
postponing the signing of the Consular Convention based on the points made by the
Embassy in telegram 3644. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
“after careful consideration” the Department decided to postpone signing the Consular
Convention in light of the Volkskammer decision. (National Archives, RG 59, Central
Foreign Policy File, D790295–0684)
Department postpone signing of the Consular Convention to show that the U.S. Govern-
ment took the East German decision to elect Volkskammer members in East Berlin
gram 1385 from West Berlin was not found.
skammer (Chamber of Deputies) approved an amendment to the 1976 election law
removing all differentiation between deputies from East Berlin and the rest of the German
Democratic Republic, as well as allowing for the direct election of deputies from East
Berlin to the Volkskammer. Previously, East Berlin deputies were nominated by the city

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
3. While we appreciate your point in refs A and B regarding consist-
ent approach by the three powers in responding to GDR action, we
do not wish our decision on Consular Convention contingent upon
actions by other allies.
4. Consequently, you should advise Deputy Foreign Minister Nier
on July 2 that we will not be able to proceed as planned with the July
3 signing of the Consular Convention due to unexpected complications.
This approach would be entirely consistent with your June 14 presenta-
tion to Nier (Berlin 3370 and State 151160) during which you advised
him that we were prepared to proceed with a July 3 signing provided
no [unfo]reseen complications intervened.6 If Nier asks when we will
be able to sign the Consular Convention, you should advise him that
this will depend upon further developments. FYI we have in mind
shortly after seating of European Parliament July 18 if there are no
further incidents. End FYI.
5. For Bonn. Embassy should advise other Bonn group members at
earliest opportunity of our decision to postpone signing of the Consular
Convention.
6. Department does not plan to make any public announcement
of postponement of signing. However, we assume that this will soon
become public knowledge, and if subject comes up at noon press brief-
ing we will acknowledge that signing has been postponed. We do not
plan to expand upon the reasons for the postponement nor to speculate
as to when the Convention may be signed. Posts should use similar
line in responding to press inquiries.
7. For Bonn. Exchange of notes and two non-papers (see State
119080)7 should obviously be postponed until further notice.
Christopher
that while the U.S. Government would prefer to sign the Consular Convention in Wash-
ington, the Department would agree to a Berlin signing by Nier and Bolen if the East
German Government continued to press for Berlin as a venue. (National Archives, RG
15, the Embassy reported Bolen’s meeting with Nier the previous day. Bolen informed
Nier of the U.S. Government position on the signing and expressed hope that “no
unforeseen developments would interfere with date for signing of Consular Convention.”
Nier agreed to sign the convention on behalf of the German Democratic Republic on
inform the West German Government that the Department agreed that the signing of
the U.S.–GDR Consular Convention take place in Bonn. (National Archives, RG 59,
Central Foreign Policy File, D790213–0491)

German Democratic Republic
131.
Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for
Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs (Derian) to the
Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs (Vest)1
Washington, July 9, 1979
SUBJECT
The GDR’s Backward Steps on Human Rights
Summary
The GDR appears to be going through a period of intellectual
ferment characterized by an open break between the regime and some
of its most prestigious writers. The Government has responded with
expulsions from the writer’s union and perhaps more ominously with
a series of laws late last month all tending to discourage East Germans
from contact with the West. There have been some positive signs, most
notably, as pointed out by Embassy Berlin, the East German public
has been treated to the rare sight of something of an open debate within
the GDR cultural establishment on the role of literature and writers.
On the whole, however, the trend here and in the related matter of
foreign journalistic activity is retrograde. It is particularly unfortunate
that the areas affected are those where the GDR had been most liberal,
namely the relatively easy access to Western ideas and the Western
media.
We seek a constructive dialogue with the GDR on human rights.
One tactic that has appeared to offer some prospect is initial concentra-
tion not on the areas in which the GDR has hitherto been most nervous,
the Wall and issues related to free movement of people, but on those
areas where the GDR has been relatively tolerant. It is this area, how-
ever, the freer movement of ideas, that is now under attack.
Our ability to make a difference in the internal debate that is
occurring in East Berlin is very limited. The GDR will continue to be
influenced far more decisively by its own perception of its security
problems, whatever advice the Soviet Union is providing, and its judge-
ment of the special needs of its relationship with the FRG. Nevertheless,
there are several reasons for us to find an appropriate means to state
our views. The GDR does have an interest in improving relations with
the U.S. It should be aware of the negative impact that recent actions
Confidential. Drafted by Greenwald; cleared by Niles, Clark, and Kornblum and in HA
and HA/HR.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
can have and weigh this in its calculations of gains and losses before
it continues on its course. Again, it is useful for us in our efforts to
establish the credibility of our desire for a long-term human rights
dialogue to demonstrate the ongoing nature of our interest in and
concern for such issues.
Background
The present situation has been building for some months. How
much it represents a planned policy, how much a response to a series
of incidents, is difficult to estimate. The larger issues, as Embassy Berlin
points out in its most interesting Berlin 36522, center, however, around
a concrete aspect of the modern German reality: “. . . the red thread
running through most of the speeches is the Western media and its
exploitation by and of GDR dissidents.” The seriousness with which
the GDR approaches these issues is suggested by the recent article in
the West German Weekly, “Die Zeit,” which characterized the impact
of FRG media on virtually all facets of East German life as “the electronic
reunification of Germany.”
Against this background, the series of steps taken by the GDR since
mid-spring suggests a renewed effort to give teeth to First Secretary
Honecker’s separation (Abgrenzung) policy, to manage the GDR’s inte-
gration into European and world politics and its relations with the FRG
in a fashion that keeps the society sufficiently isolated from Western
influences to maintain internal stability and satisfy the ever anxious
Soviets. These steps include:
—New restrictions on the activity of Western (primarily FRG) cor-
respondents in East Berlin and the GDR, including a requirement for
permission to interview any GDR citizen and to announce intended
internal travel 24-hours in advance.
—Expulsion of FRG correspondents for illegal interviews with
GDR citizens in violation of the new regulations and refusal of permis-
sion under the regulations for correspondents to cover or exercise any
journalistic activity with respect to the trial of prominent dissident
Robert Havemann on currency charges.
—Denial of permission to several leading writers including Stefan
Heym and Rolf Schneider to travel to the FRG for routine literary
functions.
and very public debate taking place in the German Democratic Republic surrounding
the expulsion of nine East German writers from the Writers’ Union. The debate, the
Embassy suggested, contributed to growing awareness of instability in the East German
cultural community. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790298–
0907)

German Democratic Republic
—Prosecutions and investigations against leading dissidents such
as Havemann and Heym based on currency charges stemming from
their publication of writings in the FRG.
—Expulsion of Heym and eight other writers from the Writers’
Union.
—Most recently, on June 28, adoption of a series of laws apparently
aimed at further isolating Western journalists and providing the state
with new legal weapons to use against East Germans who maintain
contact with the Western media or with other institutions in the FRG;
these laws include an addition to the criminal code on “treasonable
provision of news” (Landesverraeterische Nachrichtenuebermittlung) that
subjects to imprisonment for two to twelve years whomever “passes,
gathers on their behalf or makes available” to a “foreign power, a
foreign power’s institutions or representative, or to a foreign organiza-
tion as well as to the helpers of a foreign organization” material
described as “news that is not subject to being kept secret” but that is
subjectively determined to be not in the interests of the GDR. Whoever
“takes up contact with or offers himself to work with these organiza-
tions or persons or in other fashion supports these organizations or
persons” may be imprisoned for one to ten years. Another law appears
directed at the sending of manuscripts or recordings to the West.
Human Rights Dialogue with the GDR
Our efforts to establish a solid basis for ongoing discussion of
human rights with the GDR have been hampered, as with so many
other issues, by the newness and low level of relations. I attempted to
explain the humanitarian basis of our concern and our non-ideological
approach during my visit to East Berlin in October, 1978.3 I dealt more
specifically with several issues, including family reunification, pressure
on dissidents such as Havemann and Heym, and anti-Western propa-
ganda in the schools when I had a second meeting with Deputy Foreign
Minister Nier in Washington in May.4 Jim Goodby also laid the basis
for detailed discussion of certain Helsinki Final Act issues including
family reunification and the restrictions on journalists when he con-
ducted CSCE consultations in November, 1978 and during Dr. Nier’s
May visit.5
I have discussed with Ambassador Bolen and given considerable
thought to the best means to build on these initial efforts and accustom
the GDR over time to dealing with us on human rights-related issues.
3 See Document 123.
4 See Document 127.
5 See Document 129.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
On balance the GDR has a very restrictive record on movement of
people, symbolized by the Berlin Wall. This is attributable to the attrac-
tion of FRG society, which creates emigration pressure and strain on
the state’s stability unmatched in Eastern Europe. The GDR has had,
however, a relatively good record on movement of ideas. The country
is open to Western broadcasts, and there have been many and widely
used channels for GDR intellectuals to play their views back into East
German society by means of contact with Western media and publish-
ing houses. This is also a factor, of course, of the unique geographical
and political situation of divided Germany. It would be extremely
difficult at the present stage to engage the GDR directly on the former
type of issues since these could be seen as affecting its very existence.
I would hope, however, that we could over time encourage the GDR
to build on its relatively good record on access to the spoken word
and to foster a more liberal domestic climate by relaxing its attitude
toward internal circulation of the printed word and the Western con-
tacts of its intellectuals.
The recent series of events outlined above demonstrates graphically
how sensitive these subjects are. Consistency and credibility for our
human rights concerns, however, would appear to make it important
to respond to the GDR measures. I would be modest in our assessment
of what we might achieve in the short run though I doubt that our
intervention would injure people like Heym and Havemann who count
for their protection in part at least on their standing in the West.
Over the longer run, however, I would hope that it would assist us in
establishing more firmly some of the guide lines for our relations and
in identifying areas in which we can have realistic hopes that the GDR
will be able to liberalize its internal controls.
Tactics
I realize that discussion of any of these issues with the GDR at the
present time must be considered in connection with the serious Berlin
status issue created by the simultaneous decision June 28 to permit
direct election of East Berlin representatives to the Volkskammer.
Because of that violation of the Four Power status of the city, I under-
stand that we will be holding back on a number of aspects of our
bilateral relations such as the signing of the Consular Convention. We
can not make this the subject of a direct demarche to the GDR because
quadripartite matters are discussed only with the Soviet Union, not
the GDR. It would be anomalous and perhaps would offer the GDR
indirectly an opportunity to seek discussion of Berlin issues with us
were we now to make a formal demarche on human rights. It might
also provide a confusing signal as to what were our immediate reasons
for holding back on the bilateral relationship. On the other hand,
because we will not be going forward for the time being with bilateral

German Democratic Republic
steps, we can make some instructive human rights points without
risking loss of any immediate practical benefits. The alternative to a
formal demarche would appear to be informal discussion as opportuni-
ties present themselves in Washington and East Berlin.
Recommendation:
That you and I and our assistants and Embassy Berlin look for
appropriate opportunities in official contacts with representatives of
the GDR Embassy to make the following points informally:
—We have been observing with concern recent developments
involving what appear to be increasing restrictions on the activities of
foreign journalists in East Berlin and on GDR intellectuals.
—Some of these matters were raised more formally when Deputy
Foreign Minister Nier visited the Department in May. As you know,
we consider that we have a legitimate basis to raise these matters
because the ability of American journalists to carry on their profession
appears to be affected and because the Helsinki Final Act commits
both our countries to encourage the freer flow of ideas between East
and West.
—Apart from this, however, I would note to you informally that
these actions have a serious negative impact upon the way in which
the GDR is viewed by important segments of American society. This
makes it much more difficult to gain support for steps to build our
bilateral relationship in a manner that would be in our mutual interest.
—It is disappointing that this backward movement appears to be
taking place in an area—access of GDR citizens to Western media and
of GDR literary figures to their very interested Western readership—
where the GDR had hitherto created a much more favorable impression.
The new criminal code laws in particular appear to be directed at
chilling the type of human and professional contacts and flow of infor-
mation that CSCE aims at. You should be aware of the harm this sort
of thing does the GDR in the United States.
An instruction Telegram for Embassy Berlin is attached for your
approval.6
6 Attached but not printed. Vest approved the draft, which was sent to East Berlin
on July 17 in telegram 184716. In the telegram, the Department authorized the Embassy
to make only an informal approach on human rights to prevent any “confusing signal
as to our motives for holding back on signature of the Cultural Convention and other
bilateral steps.” The Embassy was further instructed to stress that East German actions
in the area of human rights will “have a serious negative impact upon the way in which
the GDR is viewed by important segments of American society.” (National Archives,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
132.
Memorandum From Stephen Larrabee of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, August 24, 1979
SUBJECT
US–GDR Consular Convention (U)
State has informed us that they intend to proceed with the signing
of the US–GDR Consular Convention in Berlin on September 4th
(Tab A).2 The ceremony will be brief, low key and without press
attendance. (U)
We made a signing of the Consular Convention a precondition for
any normalization of relations. The Convention was finally concluded
in May after the GDR backed off their position on the nationality issue.
It was scheduled to be signed on July 3, but the date of the signing was
postponed in order to indicate our displeasure at the GDR’s attempt
to unilaterally change the status quo in Berlin by instituting the direct
election of East Berlin deputies to the Volkskammer. (C)
Once the Convention is signed we will permit the GDR two foreign
trade offices in New York and a branch office of the GDR’s Embassy
Commercial Counselor in New York City. In return, we will be allowed
to open a trade office in the GDR at a site and time of our choosing
(possibly Berlin). At present, however, we have no plans to open such
an office. (C)
All things considered, I think we should go ahead with the signing,
keeping the ceremony very low key.3 The Convention is in our interest
as much as theirs. It ensures protection of US citizens and does not
imply any major expansion of relations. Moreover, we have gone the
furthest of all the allies in showing displeasure at recent GDR actions
over Berlin. (After some initial reservations, the French went ahead
with a visit by FM Francois-Poncet to East Berlin at the end of July,
and despite the initial outcry in West Germany over the GDR move,
the FRG proceeded with high-level talks on disarmament, as scheduled,
at the end of July.) We made our point by postponing the talks and
we have little to gain by drawing this out further. However, in light
Sent for action. A copy was sent to Brement.
2 Attached but not printed at Tab A is an August 21 memorandum from Tarnoff
to Brzezinski.
3 Brzezinski underlined “very low key” and wrote “yes” in the margin.

German Democratic Republic
of current GDR policies—both external and internal—we should make
no effort to expand our relations. (C)
RECOMMENDATION: That State be authorized to sign the agree-
ment on September 4th.4 (U)
4 Brzezinski approved this recommendation.
133.
Report Prepared in the Bureau of Intelligence and Research,
Department of State1
Report No. 1238
Washington, September 12, 1979
(U) EAST GERMANY’S NEW HARD LINE
(C) Introduction and Summary
The German Democratic Republic has established a set of political
control mechanisms designed to halt spreading popular restiveness
and to preempt the emergence of more serious discontent in the future.
These controls—aimed generally at Western influences and specifically
at dissidents, foreign journalists, and grumbling citizens—have had a
general chilling effect on the society and heightened its sense of alien-
ation from the regime.
The discontent is rooted most immediately in the erosion of
the regime’s ability to meet consumer demands—demands that the
Honecker regime itself intensified by its shift to “consumerism” in
the mid-1970s. The current problems indicate that without political
liberalization or growing consumer concessions, accommodation
between citizens and state will remain difficult. The ruling Socialist
Unity Party (SED), increasingly aware of its political dilemmas, is fall-
ing back on the course that comes naturally to it—hard-line domestic
controls that limit Western influences, cow the population, and no
doubt win plaudits from Moscow.
Analysis for the Commonwealth and Eastern Europe, Office Subject Files, 1967–1985,
Farlow; approved by Norbury.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
The extent to which the control mechanisms will be applied remains
to be seen. Their very announcement, however, is a setback for Hon-
ecker, who had been noted for a degree of political flexibility and
concern for popular demands. At the same time, though, the new hard
line has been sequenced in such a way as to minimize disruption in
FRG–GDR ties so that the basic framework of detente does not suffer.
East Germany’s economic plight is not unique to Eastern Europe.
But the SED has even less to fall back on than some of the other ruling
communist parties in the region—either in foreign policy independence
or in manipulation of traditional nationalism. Thus the political toll
ultimately could be more severe. At the moment, the discontent is not
overt and Honecker seems relatively secure. But should Honecker’s
new hard line not forestall the emergence of mounting discontent
within the GDR, Moscow will be forced to make hard choices on the
GDR’s political leadership and Soviet underwriting of the country’s
economy.
Honecker’s Political Dilemmas
(U) When Erich Honecker succeeded Walter Ulbricht in 1971, the
new leader tried to reach an accommodation between the regime and
the population. Honecker, while not weakening the SED’s monopoly
of power, sought to modify some of Ulbricht’s more strident domestic
policies. He did this by, inter alia:
—reorienting economic policy toward a rapid improvement in the
standard of living, in part by allowing citizens to have access to Western
money and consumer goods;
—tolerating a marginally more open intellectual and artistic expres-
sion, sometimes looking the other way when East Germans published
critical works in the FRG; and
—seeking, more recently, a rapprochement with the Evangelical
(Lutheran) Church, the one major institution outside the SED.
At the same time, Honecker made it quite clear, by maintenance of
rigid security controls, that his regime was not engaged in political
liberalization, that Western influences would be contained, and that
travel to the West would remain restricted.
(C) Honecker’s approach was not a panacea for the population,
but it was a welcome respite that allowed individuals to indulge a bit
in material values. By the late 1970s, however, it had become apparent
that these policy shifts were quietly generating a new set of problems.
—Consumerism, rooted in legalized access to West German cur-
rency, had begun to create a two-class system of “haves” and “have-
nots,” i.e., those with and those without Western money; this produced
growing resentment among the latter because hard currency was often
the only means of obtaining necessary goods and services.

German Democratic Republic
—Critical intellectuals increasingly turned to the West to publish
their works or to make known their views, many of which called for
fundamental changes in the GDR.
—The Evangelical Church, immediately after receiving unprece-
dented concessions from the state, launched an offensive against the
regime’s plans to introduce military training in the high schools.
And the SED seemed generally unable to break through a growing
malaise typified by apolitical youth, apathetic workers, and petty cor-
ruption and crime.
(C) The main catalyst in this process was the intensified coverage
of East Germany from within by FRG media, especially West German
TV, which reaches 80 percent of the GDR. With West German reporters
focusing on negative developments, grumbling citizens and outspoken
intellectuals/artists soon found a public forum for their discordant
views. This FRG media penetration, compounded by 10 million annual
West German visitors, negated Honecker’s goal of a systematic delimi-
tation between the two social/cultural systems—his much-vaunted
policy of Abgrenzung.
(C) These problems did not pose an immediate threat to the political
system or Honecker’s personal position. But looking a few years ahead,
Honecker must have heeded the gloomy projections on the economic
front and the political danger they entailed. The GDR’s bleak economic
outlook—mounting balance of payments deficits with both Moscow
and the West and a likely unwillingness by the Soviets to continue
their heavy subsidization of the GDR—pointed to the need to cut back
on imports, boost exports, and reduce consumption growth. At the
same time, the regime would have to come to grips with low prices
for retail goods which encourage the population to consume. Honecker
realized that the position of the East German consumer, while remain-
ing high by East European standards, inevitably would suffer.
(C) In this context, restiveness could be expected to grow, stimu-
lated by the almost daily barrage of negative TV coverage by the FRG.
Thus, the relative stability that the regime “bought” in the mid-1970s
threatened to dissipate by the early 1980s. Honecker and the SED
decided on a preemptive strike before matters got worse.
The Clampdown: Early Signals
(C) Honecker signaled the possibility of a tougher domestic line
in June 1978 when the SED revised Walter Ulbricht’s status from that
of non-person to “great proletarian revolutionary.” Ulbricht, the
“father” of the GDR, was a firm Stalinist who pushed East German
political institutionalization and economic modernization with fervor.
His tendency, toward the end of his career, to stress the superiority of
German socialism irritated Moscow. When he objected to Soviet detente
overtures to Bonn and to the West in general, he was removed from
office.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
(C) But from the population’s vantage point, Ulbricht remained
synonymous with hard-line communism. Thus, his rehabilitation was
not merely an attempt to define his place in East German history. It
was also intended to signal that there might be a return to Ulbricht’s
policies in the face of mounting socioeconomic problems and politi-
cal dissent.
(U) This signal was reinforced by the sentencing in July 1978 of
Rudolf Bahro and Nico Huebner—two of the GDR’s most noted dissi-
dents—to jail terms of 8 years and 5 years, respectively. These were
harsher tactics than Honecker had used in the earlier cases of folk
singer dissident Wolf Biermann—who was stripped of his citizenship
while in the West—and physicist/philosopher Robert Havemann,
who had been placed under house arrest following his protest of the
Biermann matter.
(U) The July sentencings were more reminiscent of Ulbricht’s han-
dling of the revisionist Marxists (centered around Wolfgang Harich),
who in 1957 were given jail sentences for suggesting an ideological
“third way” between East and West for the GDR. Bahro had published
in West Germany a political treatise, The Alternative, calling for a puri-
fied Marxist system in the GDR. Huebner, an East Berlin draft resister,
had used West German media to ventilate his view that the military
draft of East Berliners was illegal because all of Berlin remained demili-
tarized under postwar four-power agreements. This opinion flew in
the face of East German claims to sovereignty over East Berlin.
(C) These early signals, however, did not continue into the fall of
1978, probably because the regime wanted to conclude inner-German
transit agreements that would net the GDR at least an additional $1
billion in much-needed hard currency over the next 10 years. A crack-
down of major proportions probably would have made the FRG think
twice about concluding the agreements. With their signing in Novem-
ber 1978, both sides expected a lull in relations while an agenda of
new negotiations was being forged.
(U) The GDR was hit by disastrous winter storms in early 1979
which so disrupted the economy that economic performance for the
entire year has been adversely affected. The country continued to expe-
rience seriously sluggish growth rates into the spring, and the provision
of some basic consumer supplies remained disrupted. Western visitors
reported that complaining by the population was the most intense in
recent memory.
The Clampdown Phased In
(U) The signals of June 1978 turned into a torrent of restrictions in
the spring-summer of 1979:

German Democratic Republic
—A decree, announced on April 5, required citizens holding West-
ern currency to convert it into non-transferable coupons in order to
purchase Western goods in Intershops.
—New regulations, published on April 14, required permanently
accredited foreign journalists to obtain permission for interviews and
to notify the authorities on the details of all planned trips outside
East Berlin.
—In April, dissident writers, including noted novelist Stefan Heym,
were denied visas for travel to the West.
—An FRG television reporter was expelled in May for recording
a statement by Heym without obtaining permission.
—Both Heym and Havemann were tried and fined for alleged
violation of GDR currency regulations in accepting royalties for West-
ern publications that had not been cleared by the GDR.
—Nine dissident writers, including Heym, were expelled in June
from the GDR Writers Union for “anti-communist agitation.”
—A revision of the penal code, effective on August 1, broadened the
definition of political crimes (inter alia, by proscribing actions deemed
“harmful to the interests of the state”) and expanded considerably
penalties for conviction thereunder.
(C) It will take some time to discern how some of these restric-
tions—draconian in principle—are applied. For the moment, the regu-
lations requiring conversion of hard currency into non-transferable
coupons are proving cosmetic in that the coupons are effectively trans-
ferable. But it is clear that the Honecker regime now has a wider set
of options in dealing with recalcitrant behavior and in rooting out
Western influences. The penal code provisions are particularly chilling
because the charge of treason can be lodged against individuals who
convey detrimental information about the GDR—even unclassified—
to “foreign organizations” (i.e., Western media).
Dissidents and Journalists Targeted
(C) Dissidents in the GDR have been particularly hard hit by the
crackdown. The regime has decided to curb them as well as their de
facto publicity agents—foreign journalists. Although relatively small in
number and without a broad popular following, most of the critics are
Marxists who damn the SED for prostituting Marxist ideals, a fact
that evidently has made the regime nervous. In espousing a more
“humanistic socialism” that can encompass greater pluralism and free-
doms, the East German dissidents come close to the spirit of Eurocom-
munism and have generated some backing from that quarter. Probably
pushed by such party ideologues as Hager and Naumann, Honecker
may have come to fear that these arguments might win favor among
youth, technocrats, and others—perhaps serving to instigate a wider
political unrest that would filter down to the mass level.
(U) The initial steps to repress dissent generated an unexpected
though shortlived “public debate.” The regime actions against Heym

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
and Havemann triggered a series of protests from individuals. A group
of eight dissident writers sent a letter to Honecker criticizing his cultural
policies. The government counterattacked via Neues Deutschland by
printing letters and speeches by pro-regime writers and officials that
publicized the existence of the dissent and directly attacked some of
the critics for carrying on a “hate campaign against socialism,” collabo-
rating with the “enemy mass media,” and being “washed-up types”
out of touch with “real socialism.” This foreshadowed the expulsion
of Heym and others from the Writers Union for “anti-communist
agitation.”
(C) The expulsions—which reportedly were not unanimously
approved by the Writers Union membership—fueled the GDR’s cul-
tural crisis. Even such pro-regime persons as Writers Union President
Hermann Kant and Academy of Arts President Konrad Wolf admitted
at a June meeting of the GDR Cultural League that there were serious
problems with some aspects of East German cultural policy. Neverthe-
less, the dissidents soon fell into disarray and were generally dispirited
by the turn of events. Even such a stalwart personality as Heym indi-
cated that he had little taste for more battles with the regime, especially
given the implications of the penal code revisions.
(U) Honecker couched his justification for the cultural actions in
highly ideological terms:
“Artistic creation in socialism and for socialism is taking place not
at some remote distance from the ideological struggle between the two
big social systems of our era but right in the middle of it. In this field,
as you know, the struggle has exacerbated. This was last but not least
a result of the attempts of the capitalist mass media to interfere in the
internal affairs of our country and to poison the atmosphere. . . . It is
informative in this context, however, that in the FRG precisely those
people who are doing all they can for the preservation of capitalism,
eloquently defend every one who allegedly wishes to improve the real
socialism of the GDR.”
(C) The GDR’s repressive moves apparently have paid off, at least
for the moment. Critical intellectuals have been silenced, journalists’
contacts have tended to dry up, and in general, citizens are more
cautious about contacts with Westerners. It will likely be some time
before the dissidents reemerge with the same force they manifested in
the spring of 1979.
(C) Youth: Another Source of Concern
Perhaps of longer term concern to the regime than the highly
publicized dissidents is its failure to capture the allegiance of the vast
majority of youth. Numerous observers of the East German scene have
been struck in recent years by the erosion of family cohesiveness in the
urban centers and the increasing manifestation of anti-social, apolitical

German Democratic Republic
behavior by younger people. They have been captivated, not by German
“socialism,” but by the culture and lifestyles of their Western peers.
Unable to travel to the West and resigned to an ersatz emulation of
Western ways, younger people have increasingly sought solace in alco-
hol, drugs, rowdyism, and petty crimes.
While East German youth are basically apolitical, some of them
are intrigued by West German coverage of East German dissidents,
and the more educated are aware of the dissidents’ ideas. It is conceiv-
able that some could one day be converted to an anti-regime “cause”
cloaked in Marxist revisionism. But, more immediately, East German
youth are more likely to be concerned about Honecker’s new efforts
to limit Western influences; they no doubt worry about the conse-
quences of maintaining their Western contacts and encounters.
The regime fears a recurrence of youth riots—such as broke out
spontaneously at a rock concert at Alexanderplatz on October 7, 1977.
The Alexanderplatz riot manifested anti-police and anti-state attitudes
and demonstrated that frustrations among East German youth can give
rise to violence and conflict. Thus, it is not surprising that the Honecker
regime has stepped up its socialization efforts in the schools, most
recently by introducing military training in high schools.
(C) International Considerations and Ramifications
There is no evidence that East Germany’s new hard line was
instigated directly by the USSR. But Moscow no doubt encouraged
and perhaps even guided the sequencing of the SED’s moves so that
the broader dimensions of detente were not seriously disrupted. The
Soviets reportedly have been wary of GDR–FRG relations creating a
momentum that could not be easily controlled. At the same time,
Moscow has been concerned that Honecker’s emulation of West Ger-
man consumer standards had led to a corrosive ideological influence.
This could be tolerated when it promoted GDR stability but became
more disturbing when it threatened future unrest by setting goals that
could not be achieved.
The Soviets probably blessed the new restrictions on the grounds
that FRG–GDR–USSR detente relationships were sufficiently institu-
tionalized that Ostpolitik would not be derailed. Thus, the GDR–FRG
relationship would be momentarily cooled, Western penetration would
be cut back, but Soviet Westpolitik would go on.
That calculated gamble, thus far, has been correct. There does not
appear to have been a serious rupture in inner-German relations—in
fact, FRG–GDR talks have just resumed—nor have the events jolted
the West German citizenry. Generally, West Germany has tended to
interpret the East German events as a not-so-unusual political “spasm”
which everyone hopes will prove more restrictive in theory than in

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
practice. While the FRG’s CDU/CSU2 opposition may seek to turn all
this into a political issue in the 1980 campaign, even the conservatives
have made only perfunctory statements of condemnation. The return
to active political life after the summer lull may, however, spark opposi-
tion protests.
(C) Prospects
The irony of the GDR’s political situation, on the eve of its 30th
anniversary (October 7), is that—more than most other East European
states—it is still a regime with few options in creating a legitimizing
formula. With 400,000 Soviet troops, the GDR can hardly move far
from Soviet control. Moreover, the political use of German nationalism
would raise the specter of reunification and run against the regime’s
efforts to create a separate socialist national identity. Recurrent, some-
what halfhearted, attempts to portray the GDR as the repository of all
“progressive” aspects of the German past have yet to win out with the
population over the allure of pan-German nationalism. With “consum-
erism” on the decline, there is nothing left to fill the vacuum.
For the time being, coercion appears to be an effective compensa-
tion for the social maladies and political liabilities. The Honecker
regime, while weakened in comparison with a few years ago, remains
in control; there are no signs that the Soviet are ready to dispense with
Ulbricht’s successor. A continuing economic deterioration, however,
could heighten frustrations that might lead to sporadic strikes by work-
ers and other demonstrations by students and disillusioned consumers.
Also, it could very well be that a blowup elsewhere in Eastern Europe
might have a “domino” effect in the GDR, acting as a catalyst to latent
discontent. In such a context, Moscow would be forced to make some
hard choices on whether to retain Honecker and whether to provide
new subsidies to a sagging East German economy. All in all, it will
not be a particularly festive 30th anniversary in the GDR.
2 Christian Democratic Union/Christian Social Union. [Footnote is in the original.]

German Democratic Republic
134.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, April 18, 1980
SUBJECT
Consular Convention With the GDR
Attached at Tab B2 is a letter from Cy transmitting the Consular
Convention with the German Democratic Republic, which was signed
at Berlin on September 4, 1979, with the recommendation that you
transmit it to the Senate for ratification.
A Letter of Transmittal to the Senate is at Tab A.3 Speechwriters
have cleared the text.
The signing of the Convention represents an important step in the
broadening and improving of our relations with the German Demo-
cratic Republic. At present there is no bilateral consular agreement
between the United States and the German Democratic Republic. The
convention establishes firm obligations on such important matters as
free communication between a citizen and his consul, notification of
consular officers of the arrest and detention of their nationals and
permission for visits by consuls to nationals who are under detention.
The Convention was worked out in close consultation with other
Allied Powers and the Federal Republic of Germany. It does not affect
the current legal regime in Berlin.
In the current difficulties over Afghanistan we have sought to
distinguish between USSR and the Eastern Europeans and to maintain
relations with the latter. This step will not only conform to that policy
it will also be mildly reassuring to our allies, particularly the FRG,
which is concerned that the crisis over Afghanistan will cast a pall on
relations with the GDR.
randum for Brzezinski. The President signed the letter on April 21, and the package
was sent to the Senate on April 28.
2 Attached but not printed.
3 Attached but not printed.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
RECOMMENDATION
That you sign the Letter of Transmittal at Tab A.4
4 The Senate ratified the Consular Convention on July 2. The Department of State
forwarded the instrument of ratification to the White House for the President’s signature
on July 15, under a covering memorandum from Tarnoff to Brzezinski. The instrument
of ratification was forwarded to the President on August 6 for his signature. (Carter
135.
Telegram From the Embassy in the German Democratic
Republic to the Department of State1
5267. USCINCEUR for POLAD. Madrid for USDEL CSCE. Subj:
One Year Later: GDR Popular Mood Darkens. Ref: Berlin 5229.2
1. (C-entire text) Summary: This message helps to flesh out the
description in reftel of the mood of discouragement and pessimism
pervading the GDR population. It shows that there has been a distinct
shift in popular attitudes over the past sixteen months. Parts of the
report were included in abbreviated form in reftel. End summary.
2. FSO Wayne Merry recently transited the GDR en route to his
new post in Moscow. He revisited many of his former contacts during
the period Oct. 15–28. The Ambassador asked him to compare popular
attitudes then and now. Merry’s report follows.
3. Sampling of views: During a two-week unofficial visit to Berlin
and the GDR, the reporting officer conducted an intense series of con-
versations with East German contacts developed during his 1977–79
tour as a political officer at Embassy Berlin. These contacts represent
fifteen households located in East Berlin and in five communities in the
Confidential; Priority. Sent for information to Warsaw, Belgrade, Bonn, Bucharest, Buda-
pest, London, Madrid, Moscow, Munich, Paris, Prague, Sofia, West Berlin, USNATO,
and USCINCEUR.
pessimism in the German Democratic Republic over events in Poland and increas-
ing concern on the part of the East German leadership with regard to popular unrest.
The telegram concluded that the East German leadership would continue to overreact
to Polish developments. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,

German Democratic Republic
southern and western GDR. Consisting of pastors, lawyers, academics,
intellectuals, and a few workers, most of these contacts are very politi-
cally aware and are in a position to reflect not only their own views
but also those of their professional clientele and communities. All of
the conversations dwelt both on the East German popular mood in
mid-October and changes in that mood in the year since the reporting
officer’s previous visits. What follows is a distillation of the most poli-
tically significant themes.
4. Poland dominated every conversation: The future of Poland was
almost synonymous with a palpable fear that deterioration of East-
West relations could lead to war. Most contacts believed that the Soviet
Union probably would eventually use military force against Poland,
that the GDR Armed Forces would be compelled to participate, and
that the Polish workers and army would resist fiercely. All felt that
such a conflict would at best lead to the total breakdown of detente
in Europe and the freezing of internal reform in Eastern Europe for a
generation, and at most to a general conflagration. None of the
contacts believed that the GDR leadership would have any substantive
say in these events but would simply be led into them by the Soviet
Union; none believed that the GDR or its Armed Forces would disobey
Moscow’s orders. While admiring the courage and audacity of the
Polish workers, most contacts feared that the Polish workers’ move-
ment lacked sufficient self-control and realism to stop short of provok-
ing Soviet military intervention. All contacts were extremely depressed
at the prospect of another German invasion of Poland, even if only in
the Soviet wake. However, it was the broader question of what a Polish
war could lead to for Europe and the world which caused the most
pessimism. While there was considerable hope expressed that sober
counsels would prevail in East and West, there was little optimism
that the deteriorating world situation could be controlled.
5. Inner-German deterioration: The deterioration in inner-German
relations was linked by everyone to the Polish situation and to fears
in Moscow and East Berlin of destabilization within the Soviet Bloc.
Most contacts believed that Honecker’s recent hard-line attitude
toward Bonn was the result of direct orders from the Soviet Union
and reflected also a dominance in SED decision-making by an internal
security-minded faction led by Paul Verner. Most contacts believed
that the new GDR foreign currency exchange requirements would
significantly reduce human contacts between the two German states
for the foreseeable future, and that access to West German people,
products and literature would decline sharply. No one felt that
Western influence in the GDR could really threaten the stability of the
regime or that East German workers would follow the Polish example.
Most believed that the hardening of GDR and SED politics reflected, in

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
addition to Soviet directives, a feeling of insecurity and ineffectiveness
within the GDR leadership.
6. Poorer GDR economic performance: This ineffectiveness was
most apparent in the economic field where a decline in the quality and
availability of moderate-priced consumer goods was quite evident after
a one-year absence. All contacts believed that this deterioration was
genuine and would be of long duration, reflecting the basic inefficiency
of the East German economy and the poor planning and economic
leadership of the regime. Most assumed that the worsening of inner-
German ties would lead to even poorer economic performance in the
future due to reduced access to Western technology and lower worker
motivation as Western consumer goods become more scarce. In general,
most contacts saw a difficult period ahead for the East German economy
and especially for the average working family.
7. GDR domestic political climate: Internal political policies of the
regime appear to have tightened in the past year but not to the point
of affecting people’s day-to-day lives. None of the reporting officer’s
contacts were in any way reluctant to meet with him openly. The
change was more one of a loss of confidence in the ability of a free-
thinking individual to coexist with the GDR system without encounter-
ing serious problems in the future. The emigration of many prominent
cultural and dissident figures to the West in the past year was men-
tioned frequently as a reflection of the increasing inability of the East
German system to accommodate any publicized differences of opinion
on political and social questions. The departure of Guenter Kunert and
Rudolf Bahro were particularly cited as having deprived East German
society of figures of moral and intellectual stature. Partly as a conse-
quence of this loss of confidence, the reporting officer observed a sharp
increase among his non-church contacts of interest in the possibility
of following these writers to the West.
8. Comment: When the reporting officer arrived in East Berlin in
mid-1977 the popular mood was one of cautious but genuine optimism
about the future of East-West relations, broadening of ties with West
Germany, and East German economic, political and cultural prospects.
By the time of his departure in mid-1979 this optimism had considerably
eroded but there still existed a general view that the coming years
would be ones of progress and gradual improvement in these areas,
albeit more slowly. By mid-October 1980 this optimism had collapsed.
In its place is a general negativism about the future of life in the GDR
and a genuine dread that Europe may once again be on the road to
war. Even those individuals who believe that their own lives will not
be significantly worse in the years to come foresee a more difficult life
for the average East German and considerable social problems for the
society in the near future. It is the reporting officer’s impression that

German Democratic Republic
this broad pessimism would be even more intense and more focused
on the internal GDR situation and relations with the West if informed
East Germans were not so preoccupied with what may happen in the
next weeks or months across their Eastern border.
Okun

Hungary
136.
Memorandum From the Director of the Office of East
European Affairs, Department of State (Andrews) to the
Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs (Hartman)1
Washington, March 24, 1977
SUBJECT
Should We Return the Crown of St. Stephen?
The Issue
For years the US has taken the public position that the Crown of
St. Stephen is the property of the Hungarian people and that its return
can only be considered “in the light of substantial improvement in our
relations with Hungary.” At the same time, we have been concerned
about opposition to return of the Crown by Hungarian-Americans.
Substantial improvement has occurred recently in US-Hungarian
relations. An independent initiative to urge return of the Crown is
developing within Congress.2 We, therefore, need to address the
issue now.
Our Conclusions
We believe that the time has come to return the Crown to Hungary.
The arguments weigh heavily in favor of doing so now. There will
inevitably be some opposition expressed here to an announcement that
we are returning the Crown, no matter how skillfully it is done. But
we believe such opposition is neither deep-seated nor widespread, even
among Hungarian-Americans, and that any dust will settle quickly.
The factors supporting return of the Crown now—as outlined below—
Europe and Yugoslavia, Hungarian Holy Crown—Crown Follow Up and Prior Years
Exdis. Drafted by Schmidt and Gerth. Sent through Armitage.
2 On February 15, Congressman Charles Vanik wrote a letter to Vance stressing
Hungarian performance on human rights and family reunification issues and recom-
mending that MFN for Hungary be considered and that the Crown of St. Stephen
be returned to Budapest. On February 15, Vanik sent a handwritten note to Carter
recommending that “the time has come to return the Crown of St. Stephen to the
Hungarian people.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Europe,
USSR, and East/West, Hunter Subject File, Box 14, Hungary: Crown of St. Stephen: 4–
carry out an assessment of the issue. (Ibid.)

Hungary
are such that it will be difficult for opponents to justify that we should
continue to retain another country’s symbol of nationhood.
A. An early return of the Crown will enhance our position and our
influence in Hungary. Aside from MFN, this issue, which has been
pending for over 30 years, is the only major unresolved bilateral prob-
lem we have with Hungary. Return will strengthen our hand with the
Hungarian Government and undoubtedly will generate substantial
good will from a nation and people which continues to harbor consider-
able friendship for the United States.
B. Return will buttress the framework of expanded bilateral relations we
have developed with Hungary during the past five years, thereby increasing
Hungary’s stake in maintaining this relationship and detente as a whole.
Return of the Crown, which really is a relic of the Cold War, would
be fully consistent with our efforts to broaden and continue detente.
This step would be especially timely during a period in which overall
East-West relations are buffeted by the winds of the human rights
debate. Furthermore, we believe that achievement of this Hungarian
objective would provide an important additional inducement for them
to defend with the Soviets their improved relations with us.
C. Return to the Hungarian people of this paramount symbol of the
Hungarian nation and its independence will concretely support our long-
range goal of encouraging greater autonomy in Eastern Europe. Already a
leader within the Warsaw Pact in developing its own distinct national
paths in economic management and in its consumer-oriented “goulash
Communism”, we believe evolution toward increased Hungarian
national identity would be supported by the Crown’s return.
D. Bilateral relations have improved substantially, thus meeting our
stated condition for reviewing the issue of return. US-Hungarian relations
have improved markedly since Cardinal Mindszenty left Embassy
Budapest in late 1971. We have concluded consular and claims agree-
ments; a cultural/scientific exchanges agreement is just about ready
for signing.3 With an eye on the Crown as well as on the Johnson Act,4
Hungary has taken special pains to do everything it can to clear away
all outstanding financial issues, including payment last December of
its sole remaining debt arrearage to the USG.
3 On April 6, during his visit to Budapest, Hartman signed the “Agreement on
Cooperation in Culture, Education, Science and Technology” with Rudolf Ronai, Presi-
dent of the Institute of Cultural Relations. The purpose of the agreement was the “promo-
tion of cooperation between institutions of higher learning of the two countries, the
exchange of scholars and artists, and the translation, publication, and presentation of
artistic works of each country in the other,” as well as cooperation in scientific programs
4 The Johnson Act of 1934 prohibited the sale in the United States of bonds and
securities of and by any nation in default.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
Hungary’s attitude toward family reunification is the most liberal
in the Warsaw Pact. It has also been the Eastern front-runner in the
CSCE implementation. Hungary’s media treatment of the United States,
even during the present period of Eastern reaction to human rights
criticism, is by and large restrained and lacking in the stridency exhib-
ited by other Communist nations. Vietnam and the Hungarian role in
the ICCS are now behind us. The outstanding problem of MFN will
not be resolved without legislative action on our side or Hungarian
abandonment of an important Soviet policy position. Thus, aside from
MFN, our continued possession of the Crown and other coronation
regalia is the only major problem separating us from achieving “nor-
malized” relations with this Communist state.
It is evident therefore that, unless we expect a basic change in Hungary’s
foreign policy alliance with the Soviet Union, Hungary has done virtually all
that can be expected to bring about that substantial improvement in US-
Hungarian relations which we have related to return of the Crown. Our
policy and position over the past four years has, in effect, encouraged
positive action on the part of the Hungarians and created a feeling of
anticipation within the Hungarian Government that we will now follow
through and return the Crown. Although they appeal to each important
U.S. visitor to Budapest, the Hungarians have consciously avoided
making the Crown a public issue. However, if no action is taken by
us within the next twelve months on this question (frequently likened
to another country holding on to the Liberty Bell), an adverse reaction
within the Hungarian leadership is certain to grow.
Hungary and Human Rights
With current attention focused on human rights, Hungary presents
a substantial contrast to most of its allies. The Communist regime there,
as elsewhere, is a far cry from being democratic, but internally and
externally, Kadar now runs the least restrictive regime of any in Eastern
Europe. He has been more successful than any other Warsaw Pact
leader in satisfying the social needs of his people and in tolerating
pluralism. The confidence Kadar has gained among Hungarians was
demonstrated by his ability to increase meat prices without conflict
last summer immediately after the Polish riots.
Hungary’s sole known contribution to this winter’s dissident move-
ment was by a small group of intellectuals who sent a letter of solidarity
to the Charter 77 group. The Hungarian Government pointedly took no
action against the signatories. (The report at Tab A5 provides revealing
evidence that the Hungarian regime is prepared to continue this toler-
5 Not attached.

Hungary
ant line and even to stand up against the Soviets in its defense.) This
pragmatic attitude is shown repeatedly, such as in Hungary’s relatively
liberal travel and emigration policy, its cessation of jamming of RFE
and other Western broadcasts, and its general openness to Western
information (including recent telecasting of several unprecedented
East-West debates). Hungary’s leaders have also achieved a modus
vivendi with the Catholic Church and the Vatican which probably goes
as far as anywhere else in Eastern Europe.
If, as a complement to our policy of speaking out on gross violations
of human rights, it is useful to respond to positive trends, then return
of the Crown to Hungary at this time could be justified further on
those grounds.
Opponents and Supporters
While we have long assumed that some vocal Hungarian-Ameri-
cans would object to return of the Crown, we have been inhibited in
our efforts to assess their views more precisely lest we stir up opposition
before we were ready to move.
The Freedom Fighters Federation remains the major organization
opposing return. The public position of such organizations usually is
that the Crown should not be returned until Soviet troops leave and
free elections are conducted. Privately, their bottom line seems to be:
Don’t return the Crown as long as Kadar, “the betrayer of the 1956
Revolution”, is no longer in control. However, it is extremely difficult,
if not impossible to get a clear reading of the Hungarian-American
attitude, particularly since we are not really able to judge the degree
to which the organization’s leaders reflect the views of their constitu-
ents. In Congress, supporters and sponsors of periodic resolutions
opposing return consist primarily of signers of perennial “Captive
Nations” resolutions such as Derwinski (R, Ill.), Crane (R, Ill.), Frank
Horton (R, N.Y.), Rousselot (R, Cal.) and Dole.
We are certain the Crown would not be an issue as far as the
overwhelming majority of the American public is concerned. If pre-
sented in the right terms, we believe they would support return as a
moral act of returning an object which does not belong to us. (See, for
example, the persuasive Washington Post editorial at Tab B.)6 As for
the Hungarian-Americans, in recent years, no doubt partly stemming
from the evolution of more liberal Hungarian policies, we have begun
to see that this ethnic community is by no means united in opposition
to the Crown’s return. Several influential figures, including Ferenc
Nagy, the last Prime Minister of non-Communist Hungary, and Zoltan
6 Not attached. Reference is to “A Cold War Relic,” The Washington Post, May 14,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
Gombos, publisher of the largest American-Hungarian newspaper,
have told us they favor return. As part of this trend, US media reporting
last fall of the 20th anniversary of the Hungarian revolution reflected
a general recognition of the achievements of the Kadar regime and of
its relative acceptance by the Hungarian people.
Recently, movement to return the Crown has begun to emerge in
Congress, backed by Vanik (whose Cleveland suburban district
includes many Hungarian-Americans), Frenzel (R, Minn.), Frank
Thompson (D, N.J.) and Bingham (D–L, N.Y.). At a dinner we attended
last month at the Hungarian Ambassador’s, Vanik, Frenzel and Thomp-
son announced to all present that they were willing to gather supporters
on the Hill for a resolution urging the President to return the Crown.
Following the dinner, Vanik wrote to the Secretary and Frenzel to the
President (letters at Tab C).7 Jack Armitage talked to Bill Frenzel this
week and learned that Derwinski recently told him he would not have
a real problem with a return; Horton, however, was true to form in
stressing his opposition. Horton asserts that return of the Crown would
be contrary to President Carter’s position on human rights, a charge,
as indicated above, we think could be rebutted.
How it Should be Done
So as not to stir up opposition, return of the Crown should be
effected by a clean stroke and with no pre-event publicity, if possible,
though we will want to consult with a few key members of Congress.
You will find Clayton Mudd’s letter (attached at Tab D8) worth reading
with regard to modalities.
Following receipt of a green light from the White House, we would
have to proceed quietly and on a very closely-held basis to begin the
preparatory process which ultimately would lead to the Crown’s
return. For example, we will need to develop a logistical plan, which
involves numerous complex questions (e.g., how to move these fragile
and priceless objects, and how to pay for the move). Also, under any
circumstances, EE officers should soon inspect the condition of the
Crown and regalia and their containers, a precaution which has regu-
larly and discreetly been taken as part of our custodial obligations, but
which we have not done since December 1973.
7 Representative Bill Frenzel wrote Carter on February 22 urging return of the
Crown to Hungary “without strings and without bargaining.” (National Archives, RG
59, Bureau of European Affairs, Office of Eastern Europe and Yugoslavia, Hungarian
The Crown of St. Stephen)
8 Not attached.

Hungary
Recommendation
In the light of the enhancement of US interests which would ensue,
of the substantial recent progress achieved in US-Hungarian relations,
and of the consequent growing expectation of the Hungarian Govern-
ment, we believe the time is ripe to begin our action on the Crown.
We should begin to move soon. As Ambassador McAuliffe aptly
observed in his 1975 recommendation concerning return, the Crown
is a “wasting asset”—the longer we hold it, the less benefit we will
gain when we finally do relinquish it.9
I recommend, therefore, that, in the context of the PRM–910 review,
we seek White House authorization to study the modalities of return
of the Crown. We would be pleased to discuss this question further
with you, either before or after your visit to Budapest.11
Hungarian Crown and regalia as “the touchstone of relations” between the United States
and Hungary and recommended “the Department to conduct a thorough and basic
study of U.S. policy with respect to the continued retention of the Crown.” (National
10 See Document 7.
11 Hartman indicated neither approval nor disapproval.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
137.
Memorandum From Robert Hunter of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, March 28, 1977
SUBJECT
Crown of St. Stephen
The current flap derives from an article in yesterday’s Times on an
interview with Rep. Vanik, presumably from the Plain Dealer a day or
so before. He had indicated that the Administration was studying the
question of returning the crown.2
Vanik recently wrote to Vance on this question and on MFN.3
Vance replied that the issue of the crown would be addressed in the
context of overall improvements on US-Hungarian relations. This has
been the line for some time, including press guidance at State today
on Sunday’s article.
FYI: The desk/office have proposed to Hartman (last week) that
the issue be looked at again, with a view to seeing whether it would
be possible to return the crown. State understands the domestic political
aspects, and promises that nothing will go forward—or be said—with-
out White House clearance. Hartman will be stopping in Budapest on
the way back from Moscow. State was trying to reach Vanik, today,
to ask that he do nothing further until Hartman returns.
It is important not to indicate to Vanik that a review may be in
prospect.
Vanik also made sympathetic noises at the Hungarian Embassy a
few weeks ago. Rep. Frenzel was also there and has written the Presi-
dent. State got only courtesy copies, not request for reply.
On a related point, Vanik is also concerned about MFN for
Hungary. The position is that Hungary has been good on family reunifi-
cation. But a restrictive law remains, which prevents the President
from certifying that Hungary can be given MFN under Jackson-Vanik.
Hungary will not accept a waiver as “internal interference.” The Vance
2 On March 27, The New York Times reported that Vanik had suggested in an interview
on March 25 that he “believed he and his colleagues could assemble a majority in both
the House and the Senate to approve both” MFN and the return of the Crown to Hungary.
(“U.S. is Urged to Return Hungary’s Ancient Crown,” The New York Times, March 27,

Hungary
letter to Vanik indicated these problems and said we were looking at
ways to deal with the situation.
Lowenstein says the problem is one of finding out Hungarian-
American opinion on the crown without stirring up a fuss. You might
ask Vanik’s advice on this point.4
from Jerry Schecter to Brzezinski summarizing the discussion, Brzezinski told Vanik
that Hartman was to visit Hungary the following week and that Vanik “should do
nothing more than say ‘I have presented my views on the subject and the matter will
be looked into” if pressed on the Crown. Brzezinski also advised Vanik that the Depart-
ment of State was looking into MFN for Hungary given Hungarian refusal to accept a
waiver for compliance with the Jackson-Vanik Amendment. (Carter Library, National
Security Affairs, Staff Material, Europe, Soviet Union, and East/West, Hunter Subject
138.
Telegram From the Embassy in Hungary to the Department
of State1
1164. For EUR only. Subject: Secretary Hartman’s Visit to Budapest.
Ref: State 081127.2
1. Following are Crown and MFN portions of Hartman-Nagy dis-
cussions as excerpted from airgram forwarded to Department (reftel).
2. The Crown
A) Nagy said U.S.-Hungarian relations were now almost normal.
Both sides are willing to discuss any matter arising concerning the two
countries. The general atmosphere is good. Many questions have been
settled between the two countries. We have indeed come a long way.
He noted the exchange of high-ranking officials between the two coun-
tries and stressed that Hungary wishes to continue to normalize
relations.
Confidential; Priority.
excerpt and transmit to the Department the sections of his discussions with Nagy dealing
with the Crown of St. Stephen and MFN status. (National Archives, RG 59, Central
Foreign Policy File, D770125–1097)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
B) Nagy gave a tactful history of Hungarian patience with respect
to the Crown. He said that during the past year the Hungarian Govern-
ment, from some things that had been said and how they had been
said, looked at U.S. remarks as something akin to a promise to soon
return the Crown. To raise a warning signal would be foolish, even
nonsensical, but still, Nagy said, time is running out. He hoped resolu-
tion of this problem would not take too long because, given the present
state of U.S.-Hungarian relations, people in high places might not
understand and might lose their patience.
C) Secretary Hartman agreed with Nagy’s positive assessment of
American-Hungarian relations. He said the new administration had not
yet addressed such problems as the Crown but this is understandable
in view of the many pressing international and domestic problems it
has had to cope with at the outset. With respect to the Crown, Hartman
said the generally improving relations between Hungary and the U.S.
should be helpful. He added that the U.S. is aware of the importance
that Hungary attaches to this issue.
3. MFN
A) Even more than the question of MFN, Hungary, according to
Nagy, is worred about the long-term reliability of the U.S. as a trading
partner. Trade union pressures and congressional action continually
threaten existing trade arrangements, so much so that Hungarian
exporters are afraid that, once they enter into a business relationship
with the U.S., the rules of the game will change. This is too risky for
the constructive development of trade relations. Then, of course, there
is the time limitation on any commercial agreement between the U.S.
and Hungary.
B) With respect to trade, Secretary Hartman said it would be worth-
while to talk to one another about current problems to see whether
there are means to deal with them. He called attention to the free
trade philosophy of the new administration and referred briefly to the
President’s recent decision on the importation of shoes which should
permit the continued development of Hungarian shoe exports to the
U.S. Nagy asked Secretary Hartman what he meant by his proposal that
Hungary and the U.S. discuss economic matters. There is a Hungarian
proposal on the table, he said. The U.S. should withdraw its exception
under Article 35 of the GATT. What does the U.S. wish to do now?
Nagy contended further that U.S. law does not forbid withdrawing
the GATT reservations. Hartman said that the whole question of MFN
and GATT would have to be looked into on his return to Washington.
Mudd

Hungary
139.
Telegram From the Embassy in Hungary to the Department
of State1
1303. Subject: Annual Policy Assessment—Part I.2 Ref: (A) State
1. U.S. interests in Hungary: Hungary is a small state with limited
resources. Our direct bilateral economic, commercial, and consular
interests here are modest. However, I believe Hungary is important to
U.S. in context of U.S. relations with countries of Warsaw Pact. Interplay
of internal developments between and among European Communist
states is obviously important factor in long-term evolution of Commu-
nist world and its relationship with U.S. Hungary’s different economic
system (NEM), political tactics it uses to secure acceptance of its policies,
and its moderate approach to CSCE issues are factors contributing to
improvement of lot of Hungarian people; they also have an impact on
other Communist countries as well. We have an interest in seeing
Hungary developing into a more independent entity, more responsive
than ever to well-being and legitimate self-interest of its people. Hun-
gary is located strategically in center of buffer states bordering USSR.
Soviet forces stationed here, although presently outside scope of MBFR
negotiations, are strategically related to military balance in Central
Europe. Along with Hungarian forces they pose counter-weight to
Western forces in Italy and, under certain circumstances, a potential
threat to Yugoslavia and Romania. Hungary has taken an advanced
position within the Warsaw Pact on CSCE and human rights and
has been [garble—working?] actively to improve relations with U.S.
Because of former it has been subject to criticism from its allies. As
Confidential; Priority.
2 Parts II and III of the Annual Policy Assessment were transmitted in telegram
the Policy Planning Staff’s FY 1979 Broad Trends forecast as general guidance to posts
for preparing the Mission’s policy and resource assessment reports. (National Archives,
posts, February 19, provided further guidance for annual policy and resource assess-
41169 to all European posts, February 24, Hartman further clarified the Bureau’s expecta-
tions with regard to the policy and resource assessment report. With regard to Eastern
Europe, Hartman requested that posts give their views “on the overall approach the US
should adopt in its relations” and whether there should be any differentiations between
the countries and if so what those differentiations should be based on. (National Archives,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
S/P forecast stresses (paras 6 and 9, reftel A), it is in U.S. interest to
encourage continuation of these policies. Few would argue against
view that it is in U.S. interests to nurture Hungarian awareness of and
pride in its Western cultural heritage and to expand cooperation with
West so that humanism, liberal ideas, and pluralistic ideals continue
to permeate Hungarian society to detriment of Moscow influence. I
believe that, to extent that Hungary develops profitable relations with
U.S., its unquestioning responsiveness as a Soviet ally will be propor-
tionately reduced. I estimate that, barring a sharp turndown in U.S.-
Soviet relations, Hungary will continue to pursue relatively liberal
policies over next few years as it has since 1975.
2. Overview: Over past two years Hungary has shown a noticeable
interest in improving relations with U.S. Bilateral relations have pro-
gressed at a steady rate, reflecting pace and level that Hungary is
prepared to accept in its special relationship with USSR. Improvement
in our relations has been marked by signing of a cultural/scientific
agreement, expansion of USIA activities, settlement of all outstanding
financial obligations to U.S. (including payment by GOH of World War
I flour debt and agreement on settling blocked forints account problem),
a series of high-level visits by leaders of two countries, progress on a
number of divided family cases, a constructive bilateral approach on
CSCE, an agreement on reciprocal visa facilitation for diplomats and
officials, removal of all internal travel restrictions on official Americans,
and improving Embassy contacts with Hungarian counterparts. GOH
strengthened its position in past year by improving somewhat its bal-
ance of trade, adroitly carrying off price rises on meat and other con-
sumer items, and by tactfully ignoring letter of support sent by 34
Hungarians to Charter 77 signers. Dropping hard-liner and pro-Soviet
Arpad Pullai from HSWP Secretariat during year also strengthened
Kadar’s hand and was large step towards ensuring that his successor
is likely to be someone of Kadar’s stripe. Despite this significant forward
movement U.S.-Hungarian relations in the future will be conditioned
by the following factors, most of them outside realm of bilateral
relations.
(A) U.S.-Soviet relations: U.S. relations with Hungary are depend-
ent on the state of relations between Moscow and Washington. If, for
whatever reason (e.g. demise of Brezhnev, return to Cold War, etc.),
U.S. relations with Soviet Union degenerate, U.S. relations with Hun-
gary would also suffer, as testified to by current minor dampening
during human rights debate and in aftermath of Secretary’s visit to
Moscow.4
a U.S. proposal for arms reduction. See Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. VI, Soviet Union,
Documents 16–23.

Hungary
(B) Human rights issue: Hungary has no dissident problem even
remotely similar to that afflicting other EE countries. This derives as
much from general support by intellectuals of Kadar’s policies as it
does from Hungarian penchant for distinguishing themselves wherever
possible from their WP allies. Kadar’s decision not to take action against
a group of 34 intellectuals who signed a petition in support of Charter
77, however, seems to have caused some strain with his allies. At recent
Sofia Conference of CP Secretaries Hungary was apparently criticized
by several parties for its tolerant attitude towards dissent. Hungarians
are wary of human rights issue. They fear that U.S. may push issue
with USSR to point of hardening Soviet relations with U.S.5 Reaction
in Hungary to such an eventuality would be to detriment of Hungary’s
relations with U.S. which Budapest has so assiduously cultivated for
past two years.
(C) Implications of developments elsewhere in Eastern Europe: A
Soviet decision to use force in post-Tito period to restore Moscow
hegemony over Yugoslavia could not fail to have an impact in Hungary
harmful to U.S.-Hungarian relations. This would be true particularly
if, as in Czechoslovakia in 1968, Hungarian troops in token or in other
form were asked to participate in the pacification of Yugoslavia. Even
if only Soviet troops now stationed in Hungary were used in such
an adventure in Yugoslavia, the atmosphere in Europe would be so
poisoned that a turndown in U.S.-Hungarian relations would be
inevitable.
U.S.-Hungarian relations might also be affected by developments
in other Eastern European countries. Hungarians have been seriously
worried over past months re course of events, particularly in Poland
and, to lesser extent, in Czechoslovakia. Hungarian leadership is keenly
aware that food riots or other widespread disorders in Poland, given
Hungary’s Polish connection (1848 and 1956), could stimulate similar
disorders in Hungary if economic situation were to deteriorate. Current
plans for consumer income growth are relatively modest and reasona-
officials were “increasingly concerned about future of detente in light of heavy stress
laid by the President, Secretary Vance, and others on human rights issue” and that, in
the Hungarian assessment, Soviet reaction to the administration human rights policy
may spark a turndown in relations with West. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
reported: “the emergence of a party line, without doubt emanating from Moscow, on
Soviet views about future of detente and East-West relations.” Its Hungarian contacts,
the Embassy concluded, paint a picture of a “grim, remarkably insecure, almost paranoid
Soviet Party leadership, worried to death about what it perceives as a genuine threat
or challenge to its power, and incredible as it may seem, believing that the U.S. stand on
human rights is deliberate strategy designed to overthrow the Soviet regime.” (National

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
ble, but highly dependent on factors outside GOH control. Deteriorat-
ing economic conditions might force Hungary to trim radically its
relatively liberal internal policies. Similar concern re dissidence in
Czechoslovakia is prevalent, but I doubt to same degree as concern re
Polish situation.
(D) Challenge to Soviet position in EE: It has long been recognized
as an integral part of USG EE policy that in context of gradually increas-
ing independence of these states, U.S. policy must be particularly cir-
cumspect in order that Moscow’s leadership does not become so
alarmed as to lead to a destabilization as happened in 1956. Thus, U.S.
policy must be cautious and conditioned by Budapest’s own estimate
of the outer limits of Soviet tolerance of its activities.
3. Issues, objectives and courses of action: As S/P suggests in its
trends paper, I assume that there will be substantial forward momen-
tum in U.S. relations with Soviet Union. If there is, we should be able
to take advantage of developing opportunities to resolve our three
main problems, all of which require Department decision: (a) Crown,
(b) USG property, and (c) MFN. Progress on these issues would have
favorable impact on general course of U.S.-Hungarian relations.
(A) Crown: For over a year now, Hungarians have made known
their growing expectation that Crown would soon be returned, temper-
ing their approaches with tacit understanding that 1976 was an election
year. I believe that USG should make a decision now to return the
Crown to Hungary and that we should convey this decision to Hungari-
ans in carefully conditioned language which would leave us an escape
route in event of breakdown in East-West detente or some other unex-
pected but equally untoward event. Retention of Crown is now more
of an obstacle than an asset in U.S.–GOH relations and threatens to
retard their further development.
(B) Property: Although GOH has indicated a willingness to under-
take serious discussions to resolve property problem,6 USG has not
been able to move forward with negotiation proposals because FBO
failed to respond favorably to repeated Embassy requests for an assess-
ment of property’s value. I believe it is essential to develop a coordi-
nated USG position, one clearly designed to produce concrete results
and based on a professional estimate of property values and many
options open to us for settling our present and future needs. I am
convinced that a favorable approach on Crown, as suggested above,
6 The U.S. Government owned several buildings in Budapest in excess of its needs
and sought to sell them to the Hungarian Government while building modern office
space for its staff. Washington also requested payment for property expropriated by the
Hungarian Government.

Hungary
would provide a climate of sufficient good will to bring about a resolu-
tion of this problem during period when modalities for return of Crown
are being discussed. But we must move now on getting an FBO property
assessment to take advantage of present climate.
(C) MFN: Ambiguity exists as to whether GOH can meet our
requirement for assurances about liberal emigration policies. In very
near future we should establish USG’s position concerning what it
wants from GOH. We should then move at a deliberate pace to ferret
out GOH intentions and capabilities. Depending on how situation
develops, we may not wish to attempt to resolve this question until
issues of Crown and U.S.-owned property in Budapest have been
resolved or are well on way to resolution.
4. I strongly believe that bilateral relations with each Communist
country should be left to find their own level. Attempts to establish
priorities between countries can only have a stultifying effect on our
relations in Eastern Europe. Decision should be made on basis of facts
obtaining in each country, with Department interjecting during deci-
sion process any overriding factors which may in particular instance
cause regional considerations to prevail over bilateral ones. Such a
policy should allow USG to achieve greatest progress traffic will bear
in each country. Moreover, dropping pecking order would not require
U.S. to legitimize repressive regimes, since we would decide in “bilat-
eral” context not to carry out any measures which in fact have that
effect. It is bad enough already that consideration of Soviet attitudes
already restricts our decision-making re Eastern European countries.
We should not add to our troubles.
5. Courses of action:
(A) Political:
(1) Return Crown in manner likely to facilitate resolution of family
reunification and property questions but without direct linkage.
(2) Encourage high-level exchanges between U.S. and Hungarian
officials to include Foreign Minister Puja and Secretary.
(3) Monitor Hungarian CSCE implementation.
(4) Further expand contacts between Embassy and Hungarian orga-
nizations, including HSWP.
(B) Military:
(1) Attempt to induce Hungarian acceptance of invitations to field
grade officers to visit army units in U.S. and, in reciprocal fashion, U.S.
officers to visit Hungarian units.
(2) Solicit earlier advance notice and greater detail in notification
of military maneuvers in Hungary. Seek to have Hungarian representa-
tives attend Western maneuvers to which they are invited and to have
GOH invite U.S. observers to Hungarian maneuvers.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
(C) Economic:
(1) Establish a U.S. position on what we require from GOH in way
of MFN assurances on emigration policy.
(2) Continue to encourage exchange of senior economic policy
officials, including Havasi and Biro, between U.S. and GOH.
(3) Promote exchange of views between American economists and
officials and their Hungarian counterparts.
(4) Encourage expansion of American-Hungarian trade, business
contacts, and joint ventures, with special attention to agriculture and
livestock development.
(5) Undertake additional market-oriented reporting.
(6) Annual participation in one of Budapest trade fairs.
(7) Conclude double taxation agreement.
(8) Attempt to facilitate activities of U.S. businessmen in Hungary
by seeking GOH cooperation in providing trade directories of potential
contacts, getting GOH to agree to expand number of direct contacts
with Hungarian firms, and by obtaining multiple entry visas for
businessmen.
(D) Informational, cultural, and scientific:
(1) Continue building exchanges and cultural and scientific pro-
gram in accordance with recently concluded Cultural/Scientific Agree-
ment and program document.
(2) Continue to explain U.S. foreign policy to media leaders through
regular briefings and distribution of background materials and policy
statements.
(3) Expand program of distribution of information materials in
political, cultural, academic, and economic fields.
(E) Consular:
(1) Continue present effort to resolve divided family cases by quiet
diplomacy.
(2) Seek Hungarian agreement that multiple entry visas of one-
year duration be issued to official personnel of each government whose
duties require them to travel frequently on TDY to host countries.
(3) Where feasible, develop other proposals to facilitate visa issu-
ance and eliminate or reduce visa fees.
(4) Where necessary, obtain GOH cooperation in protection and
welfare services to American citizens.
(F) Administrative:
(1) Obtain FBO team immediately to advise on value and disposal
of U.S. Government excess properties in Budapest.
(2) Begin negotiations, by early September at latest, for indemnifica-
tion of UST for nationalized properties, resolution of squatter problem,

Hungary
and sale or other disposition of excess property in Budapest, obtaining
in compensation buildings for Embassy needs.
(3) Make vigorous and persistent representations to GOH in order
to obtain more responsive treatment from diplomatic service directo-
rate to Embassy’s administrative needs, especially acquisition of rental
of living quarters for Embassy staff.
Mudd
140.
Memorandum From William Hyland and Robert Hunter of
the National Security Council Staff to the President’s
Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, April 29, 1977
SUBJECT
The Crown of St. Stephen
We met Thursday2 for an hour with Representative Mary Rose
Oakar and about six Hungarian leaders on the Crown of St. Stephen.
They are deeply concerned about the Vanik story on a possible
return. The Congresswoman assumed that this had been inspired by
the Administration.
They indicated all the reasons for not giving it back; for not giving
it to the Vatican; and for only giving it back when Hungary is “free”
(for some this meant the withdrawal of Soviet troops; for others, also
holding free elections).
We indicated that we knew of no U.S. intention to give back the
Crown. This was not being considered at a high policy level; there has
been no study. But we could not say that it would never be given back,
though of course it would be appropriate, if consideration were given
to doing so, to consult with Congress beforehand. This would be
consultation with all elements of Congress, including Representative
Vanik and others of his persuasion.
comments on p 2. ZB” in the margin with an arrow pointing to the subject line and
returned the memorandum to Hyland and Hunter
2 April 28.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
They asked for four things:
1. A history of how the Crown was acquired (Bob Murphy was
the intermediary)—which they believe could help them for juridical
reasons, if it was not war booty. We said we would try, but that in
any event a promise made like that 30 years ago was not really relevant.
2. To see the text of the cultural agreement with Hungary. We said
we would send it.
3. To have a simple statement from the Administration that it is
not our intention to give back the Crown. We said that we could not
pledge that, and would have to refer it.
4. Representative Oakar also wants Administration backing for
her bill requiring the approval of Congress before the Crown could be
given back.3 We temporized, but she may come back again.
We therefore refer the issue back to you for guidance. Do you
want to put out such a statement? Would you be willing to have the
Administration support her bill?4
We do not support either course of action: but it will be hard to
get out of the first one.
Could we have your further thoughts before proceeding?
(Hyland thinks it is senseless to play around with the Crown:
raising the issue of returning it would just do political harm, and
actually doing so would gain us nothing with the Hungarians.)
RECOMMENDATION
1. That you approve the memorandum at Tab I5 asking State for
a history of the Crown’s acquisition and an accounting; and
2. That you give us your views on how to proceed.
Crown of Saint Stephen and other relics of the Hungarian royalty remain in the custody
of the United States Government and that they not be transported out of the United
States, unless the Congress provides otherwise by legislation.” The bill was discussed
in subcommittee, but was never submitted to a vote on the House floor.
4 Brzezinski marked the paragraph and wrote at the bottom of the page, “No—
there’s no point in blanket, timeless negative commitments of ‘I’ll never beat my
wife’ variety!”
5 Not attached. Brzezinski signed the memorandum to Vance on May 2, requesting
that the Office of the Historian at the Department of State prepare an unclassified
memorandum on the manner by which the Crown of St. Stephen came into U.S. posses-
sion at the end of World War II. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material,
Europe, USSR, and East/West, Hunter Subject File, Box 14, Hungary: Crown of St.
Office of the Historian on May 24. (Ibid.)

Hungary
141.
Action Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State
for European Affairs (Hartman) to Secretary of State Vance1
Washington, undated
Moving Forward with Hungary: The Crown of St. Stephen
We have been giving considerable thought to the appropriateness
of returning the Crown of St. Stephen to Hungary. Congressman Van-
ik’s recent speech suggesting return of the Crown provoked some
sharp, adverse reaction from Congresswoman Oakar, who has a strong
ethnic constituency, and from Congressman Horton. However, Vanik’s
position also has support and we believe that domestic reaction, even
in the Hungarian-American community, will not be entirely negative.
The President is generally aware of the problem: he promised Vanik
a reply after the Crown issue was reviewed. We have prepared the
attached2 memorandum to the President in part as a way to pull our
thoughts together on the issue of policy toward Hungary. However,
there seems to be some divergence of views on the NSC staff regarding
the Crown’s return and we have made no effort yet to sound out
Brzezinski.
The Hungarians have also been exploring how they might obtain
MFN treatment from us. They may be willing to conform (as Romania
did) to Jackson-Vanik requirements. We intend to move forward cau-
tiously in this area, bearing in mind the possible impacts on US-Soviet
relations and prospects for change in Jackson-Vanik.
Recommendations:
That you sign the attached memorandum to the President.3
ALTERNATIVELY, that you agree to meet with a small group
including Warren Christopher, Matt Nimetz, myself and several others
Europe and Yugoslavia, Hungarian Holy Crown—Crown Follow Up 1979 and Prior
Secret; Nodis. Drafted by Boutin, Gerth, and Nimetz on May 18; cleared by Armitage,
Hansell, Katz, and Jenkins. Sent through Nimetz. A handwritten note on the document
indicates that it was forwarded to Vance on May 26.
2 At this point the word “draft” is crossed out in pen. On May 18, Nimetz informed
Andrews he fully agreed with the recommendations in the memorandum to the President,
but that he rewrote the draft in order to shorten it. (National Archives, RG 59, Office
of the Secretariat Staff, Mr. Matthew Nimetz, Counselor of the Department of State and
Under Secretary for Security Assistance, Science, and Technology, January 1977 thru
3 Attached but not printed. A significantly revised version was signed by Vance
on June 3. See Document 142.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
to discuss this problem and especially how best to approach the White
House, the Congress and interested public groups.
142.
Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance to
President Carter1
Washington, June 3, 1977
SUBJECT
Strengthening Relations with Hungary—The Crown of St. Stephen Issue
The Crown of St. Stephen, the paramount symbol of Hungary’s
nationhood and Western Christian tradition, and other coronation
regalia have been in our safekeeping since they were given to us by
the Crown Guard at the end of World War II. We have publicly
acknowledged that they are property of the Hungarian nation. Our
policy that the Crown’s return will be addressed in light of improve-
ment in bilateral relations has encouraged Hungary to move ahead
with us in anticipation that we will follow through in good faith. Today
only three major issues separate us from the firm working base of
“normalized” relations—the Crown, most favored nation status and
consolidation of USG-owned property in Budapest. So far the Hungar-
ian leadership has made informal requests for the Crown. If we take
no action during the current year, they may make a formal demand—
and the United States has no legal grounds to refuse.
The Communist regime in Hungary is a far cry from being demo-
cratic, but over the past few years, Hungary has developed into the
most internally liberal country in the Warsaw Pact: a tolerant attitude
toward dissidents, good church-state relations and a modus vivendi with
the Vatican, openness to Western information, a relatively liberal travel
and emigration policy, and an innovative, decentralized economic sys-
tem. Party Leader Janos Kadar has so far successfully defended this
position against Warsaw Pact hardliners.
Domestic Political Aspects
Congressional attitude is split on the Crown. Several (e.g., Vanik,
Frenzel, Thompson, Bingham and Fenwick) believe the time has come
Hungary
to return the Crown. Vanik, who has a substantial Hungarian constitu-
ency, has suggested the idea of a joint resolution favoring return. Oppo-
nents of return include Horton and Oakar, sponsor of a recent bill
requiring that the Crown not be returned without Congressional autho-
rization. We have not yet conducted a survey of the leadership in
Congress, but we believe the domestic political problem is manageable:
that there would be a brief, limited flurry of protest but no sustained
opposition.
Some Hungarian-American groups oppose return of the Crown,
charging it would bestow “legitimacy” on the Kadar regime. For most
Americans, return of the Crown would not be an issue, and return
would probably be supported as a moral act. As Congressman Frenzel
said, “It’s theirs’ it’s right to return it to them.”
We believe that the presence of the Crown in Budapest would
serve as a continued national inspiration to the Hungarian people and
that this would soon be recognized here, even by opponents of its
return. Furthermore, such steps as consultations with Congress (and
a possible joint resolution supporting return), Congressional participa-
tion in the transfer of the Crown in a public ceremony in Budapest,
and a Hungarian commitment to place the Crown on permanent public
display would mitigate initial adverse reaction.
CONCLUSION
I strongly support the early return of the Crown to the Hungarian
people because:
—U.S.-Hungarian relations have improved substantially, meeting
our stated condition for considering the Crown’s return.
—Morally and legally it is indefensible to continue to withhold
from the Hungarian people their most important symbol of nationhood.
—Return of this symbol of Hungary’s independence and Western,
Christian tradition will concretely support our long-range goal of
encouraging greater autonomy, national identity and Western orienta-
tion in Eastern Europe.
—Support for return is emerging in Congress and domestic opposi-
tion is limited.
—It would be in our interest to return the Crown in a generous
gesture by a new Administration, rather than in the context of Hungar-
ian demands.
—The prospect of the Crown’s return would facilitate a favorable
resolution of the complex property problem in Budapest.
—There is no countervailing reason for holding on to it—we cannot
expect the emergence of a non-Communist government in the foresee-
able future, and it would be inappropriate to seek to “trade” the Crown
for something we want.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
If you concur that return of the Crown is appropriate, we will
consult with the leadership in Congress (in the House, O’Neill, Rhodes,
Zablocki and Derwinski, who has already indicated he would offer
only token opposition; in the Senate, Byrd, Cranston, Baker, Sparkman
and Case). Unless we encounter unexpected, strong Congressional
opposition, we would then go ahead immediately with quiet “hypothet-
ical” talks with the Hungarians about how transfer could occur.
Recommendation:
That the Crown of St. Stephen be returned to Hungary this year
and that the State Department take the necessary action to effect its
transfer along the lines I have outlined.
143.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, June 14, 1977
SUBJECT
Hungary: Crown of St. Stephen
At Tab A2 is a memorandum from Secretary Vance, strongly recom-
mending that the United States return to Hungary the “Crown of St.
Stephen”—that nation’s regalia which has been in our possession since
the end of World War II. He recommends consulting with the Congress,
and then talking with Hungary about the Crown’s return.
He lists a number of foreign policy advantages, including:
—we have previously tied return of the Crown to improved
relations; relations have improved to some degree;
—returning the Crown would encourage Hungarian autonomy
and national identity;
—the remaining property issues we have with Hungary could be
solved more easily; and
—it is better to take an initiative to return the Crown, before it is
formally asked for by the Hungarian Government.
at the top right corner to indicate that he had seen it.
2 See Document 142.

Hungary
Issues
—Domestic: Congressional opinion is divided. However, there
would be a strong negative reaction from the most vocal elements of
the Hungarian-American community. This could be partially dealt with
through consultations with Congress and through the method of return:
a public ceremony in Budapest, a commitment from Hungary to display
the regalia publicly, and perhaps even sending it back on August 20,
St. Stephen’s Day.
—Foreign Policy: the advantages listed by Secretary Vance must be
seen in a broader perspective:
—returning the Crown would show our “good faith” as we
approach the CSCE meetings;
—since there is consideration in both the Administration and Con-
gress about extending MFN to Hungary, also returning the Crown
would be a strong sign of our interest, that could be seen as a shift of
our overall East European policy;
—on the other hand, we still have not decided on a basic strategy for
Eastern Europe. Returning the Crown before that process is completed
foreshadows decisions you may want to consider, concerning trade,
political relationships and policy toward the USSR. (An overall strategy
will be considered in the context of follow-up to PRM–9, due on
June 15.)3
RECOMMENDATION
That you delay4 a decision on returning the Crown of St. Stephen
until our overall East European strategy is decided, on an expedited
basis:5
Delay decision, pending consideration of East European
strategy
Begin consulting with Congress in order to return the Crown
(Secretary Vance’s recommendation)
Do not return the Crown at this time
3 See Document 7.
4 In a June 12 memorandum to Brzezinski, Hyland and Hunter described the Vance
memorandum as “one sided and lack[ing] perspective” and recommended that the
decision be delayed until the broader decision on policy toward Eastern Europe is
addressed in the context of PRM–9. Returning the Crown at this time, they argued,
would raise questions about the administration’s message to East Europeans: Was Hun-
gary being rewarded for being more liberal or was the United States putting the “seal
of legitimacy on Kadar?” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material,
5 Carter checked his approval of Brzezinski’s recommendation to delay a decision
and defer returning the Crown and wrote in the margin “Don’t heat up now—J.”
Brzezinski informed Vance of the President’s decision in a June 15 memorandum. (Ibid.)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
144.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, August 3, 1977
SUBJECT
Hungary: Crown of St. Stephen
Cy Vance’s memorandum (Tab A)2 sets out a scenario for returning
the Crown of St. Stephen to Hungary by September 15, before the
opening of the CSCE Conference about September 27. Return of the
Crown would highlight Hungary’s generally good human rights
record. Cy suggests that the crown be returned by a distinguished
government or public figure, such as the Vice President or Governor
Harriman, accompanied by members of Congress.
Cy also recommends that Ambassador Kaiser, while presenting
his credentials in early August, inform the Hungarian President that
we will return the Crown, under conditions to which the Hungarians
apparently are prepared to agree.
Under this scenario, we would consult with members of Congress
but only after Kaiser has made the necessary arrangements with the
Hungarian Government.
However, I believe the arguments for deferring a decision on the return
of the Crown are still compelling.3 (Your last guidance and Ham’s
comments on the issue are attached at Tab B.)4 Domestically, there is
still little to be gained by return and something to be lost in the reaction
from vocal elements of the Hungarian-American community. The Vati-
President has seen.”
2 Dated July 28. Attached but not printed.
3 In a memorandum for Brzezinski dated August 2, Hyland, Treverton, and Hunter
recommended that he oppose Vance’s proposal. Arguing that the return of the Crown
be “a central element—one of few major instruments we have—of a strategy toward
Eastern Europe,” they stressed that since domestic opinion is divided, “there are no
kudos to be had for return and some flak to be taken.” A comprehensive review of
Eastern Europe will be held later in August, they concluded, and a decision should be
joined directly to that review, and “measured directly against a refined sense of the
domestic implications.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material,
4 Jordan’s written recommendation is not attached and was not found. Rick Inder-
furth transmitted Jordan’s recommendation with an undated note to the President and
informed Carter that Jordan favored option 3 and that “from a domestic political point
of view, it is not worth the trouble it would cause at this point in time.” (Ibid.)

Hungary
can, as Cy notes, still does not regard this as an opportune moment
to return the Crown.
On foreign policy grounds, return of the Crown would be a major
signal to Eastern Europe. Our PRM review of European policy has
made clear that our policy instruments in Eastern Europe are extremely
limited. Doing something for Hungary on CSCE grounds, and doing
so before the Belgrade meeting, may itself be a good idea, but returning
the Crown is also bound to be seen as a much larger signal, which
should be deliberate and well-timed. It might be wise, for instance, to
include the announcement as an item in your UN speech (the third week
of September)—and precede this decision by the needed Congressional
consultations. This should take precedence over Phil Kaiser’s presenta-
tion of credentials.
RECOMMENDATION
That you defer a decision on returning the Crown until our overall
Eastern European strategy is decided:
Delay decision, pending consideration of Eastern European
strategy, perhaps until your UN speech5
Begin consultations with the Hungarian Government in
order to return the Crown before CSCE (the Secretary’s recommen-
dation)
Do not return the Crown at this time
5 Carter checked his approval of this recommendation and wrote at the bottom of
the page, “Why not ask Hungarian officials to make a proposal as to how Crown would
be received and displayed if it is returned. Make no commitment. Keep confidential. J.C.”
Brzezinski relayed Carter’s instructions to Vance in an August 4 memorandum. (Ibid.)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
145.
Telegram From the Embassy in Hungary to the Department
of State1
2644. Subject: Ambassador’sConversation With President Losonczi.
1. President Losonczi began our private conversation after my
formal presentation of credentials, August 4, by expressing his pleasure
over recent improvement in our relations. He referred specifically to
the Scientific and Cultural Exchange Program, to the settlement of
claims and debts, and to progress on family reunifications.
2. He then went on to talk at considerable length about detente,
the Helsinki Accord and the two special Hungarian-American prob-
lems—the Crown and MFN—and I responded briefly to the points
he raised.
3. Detente. Losonczi emphasized that the recent improvement in
our bilateral relations had been due in no small part to the detente in
the U.S.–USSR relationship. Good bilateral relations between us could
make a positive contribution to the atmosphere of detente, but it was
essential that there be a continuation of a meaningful detente policy
between the two super powers. He talked at considerable length on
this point, leading up inevitably to an expression of concern over the
present state of Soviet-American relations with a not-too-subtle blam-
ing of American actions for that situation. He hoped that there would
be a change.
4. In reply, I stated that President Carter’s policies were aimed at
the establishment of a detente relationship with the USSR based on
the enlightened self-interest of both sides. It would be unfair and unreal-
istic to impugn the motives of the President. There should be no doubt
about President Carter’s positive and constructive attitudes toward
American-Soviet relations. He had no interest in reviving the Cold
War. On the contrary, he wanted a realistic relaxation of tensions. In
order to fully appreciate President Carter’s position, I urged President
Losonczi to read the full text of President Carter’s recent speech in
Charleston, South Carolina.2 In spite of Moscow’s polemics, in recent
weeks there have been some favorable developments in U.S.-Soviet
relations as evidenced, for example, by the progress in negotiations
for banning nuclear testing and in the renewal of the 1972 Agreement
for Cooperation of Science and Technology.
Confidential.
2 Remarks at the 31st Annual Meeting of the Southern Legislative Conference on

Hungary
5. Helsinki. After expressing satisfaction that agreement had been
reached on the agenda for the Belgrade meeting, President Losonczi
stated that it was essential to think of the Helsinki Accords as a whole;
that it was a mistake to concentrate interest on only isolated parts of
the agreement. Proper evaluation of its implementation required a
broad-gauge approach. I replied that the U.S. was committed to the
effective implementation of all three Baskets, but that this did not
mean that, depending on circumstances, different signatories to the
accord would not feel compelled to emphasize different aspects of
what was a rather lengthy document. I pointed out that we were
pleased with the performance of the Hungarian Government in imple-
menting the Helsinki Accord as was evidenced by the comments made
in the Executive Branch’s report to the CSCE Commission. The continu-
ing dialogue between the top officers of the Hungarian Government
and our Embassy during the past year was productive and contributed
to and reflected the improved relations to which President Losonczi
had referred.
6. The two issues.
A. MFN. In reply to a rather impassioned plea for the granting of
MFN, I followed the line taken by State 182700.3 We shared a common
desire to increase our bilateral trade; we recognized Hungarian efforts
in this area; and we were looking forward to the opening of the National
Bank’s representation office in New York, and to the Hungarian Eco-
nomic Days planned later this year. When mentioning our satisfaction
that we had begun useful discussions about our trade agreement, I
reminded the President of the important role Congress plays in this
area as well as other areas of international interest. I also referred to
the recent visit of Mr. Nyerges to Washington and the discussions
which were now scheduled to take place in Geneva in September.
B. The Crown of St. Stephen. There was a powerful but dignified
plea for its return. The President left no doubt about how strong were
the Hungarian feelings that the time had come for the Crown to come
home. In reply I said that Hungary’s concerns on this were well known
and understood in Washington. That was all I could say at this time.4
7. Comment. I was received with what seemed to be genuine
warmth. Serious talk was interspersed with light banter. The President
was clearly pleased over the recent improvement of American-Hungar-
Policy File, D770278–0728)
the President had not taken action on Vance’s July 28 memorandum suggesting a scenario
for returning the Crown, and instructed him to remain noncommittal on the subject.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
ian relations, and was emphatic about the contribution the Hungarians
had made to that improvement. There was real concern about the course
of Soviet-American relations. The strongest feelings, however, were
reserved for the two bilateral issues that interest them most at this time.
Failure to reach satisfactory solution of these two issues, but particularly
ontheCrown,wouldhaveanadverseeffectonU.S.-Hungarianrelations,
and almost certainly sour the present friendly atmosphere.
Kaiser
146.
Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the
Department of State (Tarnoff) to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, September 22, 1977
SUBJECT
Returning the Crown of St. Stephen
Your memorandum of August 4 requested that we ascertain Hun-
garianwishesconcerningreturnanddisplayoftheCrown,withoutmak-
ing any commitment to return it.2 In response to such a query, the Hun-
garian Government informed Ambassador Kaiser last month that: 1) it
would be happy to work out the details of the transfer once our decision
had been made and we had indicated how we intended to return it; and
2) it would place the Crown on public display in an appropriate edifice
in Budapest, without restriction on foreigners or Hungarians who wish
to see it (Tab 1).3 We believe this latter statement constitutes acceptable
assurances about the Crown’s “continuing display” as set forth in Presi-
dential Directive/NSC–214 as a precondition for us to indicate to the
Hungarians our willingness to return the Crown.
assured Kaiser that if the United States returned the Crown, the Hungarian Government
would “receive it with the dignity and honor appropriate to this unique national and
4 See Document 16.

Hungary
Deputy Prime Minister Aczel reiterated to Dr. Billy Graham that
Hungary wants to put the Crown on public display and added that,
if the United States decided to return the Crown, the Hungarians would
receive it in whatever way would fit the President’s requirements.5
We believe that we should inform the Hungarian Government
before the Belgrade CSCE Conference gets under way of our willingness
to return the Crown under appropriate circumstances. Telling the Hun-
garians that we are taking this important step both because of improved
bilateral relations and Hungary’s positive attitude toward CSCE imple-
mentation should favorably affect Hungary’s attitude at Belgrade and
after. The President’s decision can be conveyed in one of the
following manners:
—By the President in a bilateral meeting with the Hungarian
Foreign Minister at UNGA;
—By a Presidential oral message to the Hungarian President, deliv-
ered by Ambassador Kaiser;
—By the Secretary to the Hungarian Foreign Minister during their
UNGA bilateral.
A Presidential bilateral with the Hungarians would be so unusual
as to provoke undesirable press speculation about the substance of the
meeting—and might lead to disclosure of our plans before an acceptable
scenario of transfer has been arranged. A Presidential oral message
delivered by Ambassador Kaiser could be used to convey our intention
right now. Since there is no pressing reason to inform the Hungarians
immediately, we prefer using the Secretary’s bilateral with the Hungar-
ian Foreign Minister (tentatively scheduled for October 1).
In New York the Secretary will also note that the Hungarian
Government has already stated its intention to us to place the Crown
on public display in an appropriate place. He will add that Ambassador
Kaiser has been asked to work out with the Foreign Minister an appro-
priate scenario of transfer that would permit the Crown’s return by
the end of 1977.
At that point we would send Ambassador Kaiser guidance, along
the lines of the Secretary’s July 28 memorandum to the President for his
scenario talks with the Hungarians. (Tab 2)6 Once we have Hungarian
agreement to a suitable scenario, we would consult with key Congres-
sional leaders and inform the Vatican.
from Budapest, September 10, judged Graham’s visit to have “exceeded his expectations,”
and to be a “highly valuable event in bilateral relations.” (National Archives, RG 59,
Central Foreign Policy File, D770328–1231)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
In working out the scenario of transfer with the Hungarian Govern-
ment, it will be important to indicate to the Hungarians at an early
date whom the President will appoint as head of the US delegation
and to suggest exact dates for the ceremony of return that would be
convenient to that individual. The Secretary’s memorandum to the
President of July 28 suggested that the Vice President or Governor
Harriman would be appropriate.
Peter Tarnoff
147.
Memorandum of Conversation1
SUBJECT
The Secretary’s Conversation with Hungarian Foreign Minister Puja October 1—
The Crown of St. Stephen2
PARTICIPANTS
US
The Secretary
Matthew Nimetz, Counselor
Philip Kaiser, American Ambassador to Hungary
George Vest, Assistant Secretary for European Affairs
Nicholas Andrews, Director EUR/EE (notetaker)
Hungary
Frigyes Puja, Foreign Minister
Ferenc Esztergalyos, Hungarian Ambassador to the US
Imre Hollai, Hungarian Ambassador to the UN
Tibor Keszthely, interpreter
The Secretary said we believe it is very important to continue to
strengthen the relationship between our two countries. We believe that
matters are moving in a constructive fashion and we would like to see
this process continue. We realize that a very important factor is the
by Andrews; approved by Anderson on October 11. The meeting took place at the UN
Plaza Hotel.
2 Vance and Puja also discussed SALT, the Middle East, and MFN for Hungary.
(Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Europe, USSR, and East/West,

Hungary
return of the Crown. We wish to take that step. The question is when
and how. We believe we should try to finalize this at an early date.
We will be giving the necessary instructions to Ambassador Kaiser so
that we will be able to move forward.
Puja said that in the Hungarian evaluation of bilateral relations,
we have basically solved all except two issues. The first is the Crown
and treasures, and he is happy to hear that the US has decided to
return it. As the Secretary is aware, it is a very important, sacred relic
of the Hungarian nation. That is why they have placed great emphasis
on its return. Undoubtedly, such an act will greatly influence the feel-
ings of the people of Hungary toward the United States. The Secretary
said we should keep this very tightly and an announcement should
only be made at the appropriate time by mutual agreement. Puja said
this was taken for granted. Hungary has never made propaganda out
of it.
148.
Memorandum From Robert King of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, October 5, 1977
SUBJECT
State Department Actions on Returning the Crown and Granting Hungary MFN
In consultation with Ambassador Kaiser from Budapest, who is
here until this weekend, State is drafting a lengthy cable of instructions
on the procedures for return of the Crown.2 It will specify the assurances
which the Hungarians must give on the display of the Crown, our
bottom of the memorandum, “Give me a history of the Crown, how it was stored before
the war, what annual honors—religious or political—was it paid, etc?” King replied on
October 12, summarizing two lengthy studies prepared by the Office of the Legal Adviser,
Security Affairs, Staff Material, Europe, USSR, and East/West, Hunter Subject File, Box
Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Europe, USSR, and East/West, Hunter
2 See Document 150.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
views on the kind of ceremony at which it should formally be handed
over, a draft public announcement, and a draft joint US-Hungarian
statement to be issued when it is returned. At my suggestion, the date
for return and the individual to head the delegation will be left open,
but State will send a memo with its suggestions. This cable will come
to the NSC for clearance.
A cable is also being drafted directing Ambassador Kaiser to under-
take with Foreign Minister Puja a discussion of the assurances that
must be received from the Hungarian government in order to satisfy
Jackson-Vanik requirements.3 (This cable will also require NSC clear-
ance.) He will attempt to get these assurances by the first of November.
Meanwhile, agency assignments for a draft trade agreement with Hun-
gary have been made and are to be completed by mid-October. Inter-
agency clearances and consultations are to take place afterward with
a view to starting negotiations with the Hungarians on the trade agree-
ment in December.
3 See Document 149.
149.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
Hungary1
249694. For Ambassador from the Deputy Secretary. Subject: Hun-
gary and MFN.
1. As you know, during Foreign Minister Puja’s meeting with the
Secretary in New York on October 1,2 Puja once again expressed the
Hungarian Government’s interest in considering the possibility of MFN
for Hungary. In response the Secretary said that you would be discus-
Confidential; Exdis. Drafted by Gerth; cleared by Luers, Schmidt, Nimetz, Johnston,
Hormats, Hansell, King, and Stahnke; approved by Christopher.
2 See Document 147.

Hungary
sing this matter in detail with the Foreign Minister in Budapest.3 As
a result, and in part as a follow-on to the technical trade talks begun
in June in Washington with Hungary’s senior trade negotiator, Janos
Nyerges, you are instructed to seek detailed discussions with key Hun-
garian authorities to explain the emigration provisions of the Trade Act
of 1974 and to obtain sufficient additional information about Hungary’s
emigration law, its application of this law, methods of dealing with
bilateral emigration problems, and Hungarian emigration to third
countries including Israel to prepare a comprehensive report that will
serve to answer executive and congressional questions on these topics.
2. You should explain to the Hungarian Government that we have
noted with favor the positive humanitarian spirit with which Hungary
is addressing family reunification matters and also that we have care-
fully considered the recent statements made by various Hungarian
officials (such as Ambassador Bartha’s statement in May to Charge
Mudd)4 on emigration as well as the formulation on emigration con-
tained in the Hungarian proposal for implementation of CSCE in
bilateral relations. You should state that, if in the course of these dis-
cussions an authoritative spokesman of the Hungarian Government
(e.g., Foreign Minister or Prime Minister) were to make an appropriate
statement indicating that the emigration practices of Hungary will
henceforth lead substantially to the achievement of free emigration, we
are prepared to move into negotiation of a trade agreement following
completion of the discussions.
3. You should indicate to the Hungarian Government that the
necessary content of such a statement has been very carefully consid-
ered by the White House to insure that, as a conclusion to your discus-
sions on Hungarian emigration practice, it would serve as a satisfactory
basis for the President to report to Congress that he has received assur-
ances as required by the Trade Act. If the Hungarian Government
prefers to make this statement in confidence, rather than publicly, the
he reported that, with regard to U.S. immigration requirements, Puja “indicated his
satisfaction that they seemed less demanding than had previously been the case.”
from Budapest, November 2, Kaiser reported that, in his conversation with Puja that
day, the Hungarian Foreign Minister said he had not yet been able to secure the agreement
of the Hungarian leadership to the proposed U.S. language on assurances prior to their
departure for Moscow, but that he would reply to the U.S. proposal as soon as they
with Bartha regarding divided family cases. Bartha assured Mudd that Hungary would
resolve all outstanding family reunification cases because “resolution of these issues is
an integral part of Hungary’s approach to human relations.” (National Archives, RG 59,
Central Foreign Policy File, D770207–0441)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
text of the statement will be treated within the U.S. Government with
the utmost confidence.
4. To meet the intent of Congress the statement must address
emigration across the board (not only family reunification), it must
apply to emigration to all countries, and it must speak to future practice.
We consider that the following statement, in the context of discussions
indicating that Hungarian law and administrative practice do not in
fact preclude emigration, would be appropriate:
Quote: I am authorized to state to you on behalf of my government
that Hungary will satisfactorily solve any emigration problems which
may arise. Unquote. This statement may be coupled with references
to traditional Hungarian policy or to the Helsinki Final Act if the
Hungarian Government prefers. (Here we note Bartha’s phrase—Buda-
pest 1907 “Resolution of these issues is an integral part of Hungary’s
approach to human relations”). The term “emigration problems” could
be adjusted to “problems of the type we have been discussing” or to
“humanitarian problems” if the context clearly shows that the parties
are talking about emigration.
4. If the Hungarian Government wishes to propose other language,
that must be referred to Washington to insure that it would meet the
requirements of the law.
5. If necessary in order to assist in your discussions of Jackson-
Vanik and Hungarian emigration as well as provide guidance if the
Hungarians wish to discuss further the language of the statement,
we are prepared to send a Department representative who is directly
familiar with Section 402 of the Trade Act5 and the Romanian talks.
trade agreement. We are now preparing a draft trade agreement.
Vance
tion from bloc countries seeking to receive MFN.
6 Circular 175 refers to regulations developed by the Department of State to ensure
the proper exercise of treaty-making power. Typically, a Circular 175 is an action memo-
randum seeking authority to negotiate, conclude, amend, extend, or terminate an interna-
tional agreement.

Hungary
150.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
Hungary1
255571. For Ambassador. Subject: The Crown of St. Stephen.
1. During their October 1 meeting at UNGA the Secretary, in accord-
ance with the Presidential Directive/NSC–21, informed Hungarian
Foreign Minister Puja of our willingness to return the Crown and asked
you to work out the details of the return with Puja.2
2. You should seek an early appointment with Puja to work out
the transfer scenario.3 In your talks you should keep in mind the
following essential conditions:
—That various segments of the Hungarian public, including the
Roman Catholic Cardinal Primate, participate in ceremonies in which
the Crown is returned.
—That the Crown will be displayed publicly and appropriately in
an historical location not associated with the Communist Party on a
permanent basis.
—That the Crown will be treated with respect.
In addition, we wish to arrange a ceremony which will emphasize
the national, religious and cultural nature of the Crown. We will
seek to underline the fact that the American people are returning to
the Hungarian people a national treasure which rightly belongs to the
Hungarians. We would plan to secure a public statement from the
Hungarian Government to the effect that Hungarians from all over the
world are welcome to visit Hungary and view the Crown.
3. Our detailed guidance for your scenario talks follows:
A) Place of return—Budapest. The USG transported the Crown
and regalia from Europe and believes it fitting to effect the return
in Hungary.
B) US delegation—The President, as Chief of State, will appoint
a senior USG official to head the American delegation. We will ask
distinguished Senators and Representatives to be participants, as well
as a senior State Department official.
Secret; Priority; Nodis. Drafted by Gerth; cleared by Andrews, Luers, Vest, and Tarnoff;
and in S/S approved by Nimetz.
2 See Document 147.
3 In an October 7 memorandum to Brzezinski, Tarnoff outlined the Department’s
proposed scenario for the return of the Crown. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
C) Date of return—In order to meet the scheduling requirements
of the proposed head of the US delegation, we wish return to take
place on Saturday December 3 or Sunday December 4. We will confirm
the exact date later. Our delegation chief, who will be accompanying
the President, would break off from the Presidential party upon com-
pletion of the Warsaw visit (the morning of December 2 or 3) and
would fly directly to Budapest. The remainder of the American delega-
tion would travel directly from Washington to Budapest.
D) Hungarian participants—We wish to return the Crown, as prop-
erty of the Hungarian nation and people, to the Head of State or his
designated representative. (FYI: Because of domestic political sensitivi-
ties here we must avoid handing the Crown over to Kadar himself or
to anyone associated exclusively with the party. End FYI.) We would
expect senior representatives of the Hungarian Government, the
National Assembly and mass organizations would participate. The
Cardinal Primate and leaders of the major Protestant denominations
and the Jewish community should be active participants. While we do
not wish to encourage Hungarian Socialist Workers Party participation,
we realize it is an important national organization and we will not
object to the presence of its representatives.
E) Nature of the public ceremony—The ceremony of the return
should be a solemn public event at an appropriate venue (Parliament,
the Royal Palace, Coronation Church), designed to underscore the his-
torical, cultural, religious and national tradition of the Crown as well
as the “people-to-people” aspect of the return. We expect that remarks
at the ceremony will be confined to pre-agreed statements which refer
only to traditional US-Hungarian ties, friendship between our two
peoples and desire to continue to development of better bilateral
relations.
F) Media participation—We anticipate that the return ceremony
will be a subject of international media interest and we wish to ensure
that press, radio and TV representatives (including VOA) will be able
to report the event from Budapest.
G) Transportation of the regalia from the United States—In order
to provide the utmost security for the regalia during transfer, we would
plan to send the Crown and regalia aboard a US Air Force airplane
together with the delegation. The plane would arrive approximately
24 hours prior to the ceremony of the return, both to provide a rest
period for the US delegates and to allow for the possibility of poor
landing conditions at that time of the year.
H) Public announcement—A joint communique announcing the
return of the Crown should be made by the White House and Hungar-
ian authorities just prior to the departure of the Crown and delegation
for Budapest. Text of the suggested joint communique follows: Quote

Hungary
(title) “The President of the United States of America has determined
that it is appropriate and fitting that the Crown of St. Stephen and
other Hungarian coronation regalia, which have been in the custody
of the United States since the close of World War II, be returned to
the people of Hungary. For this purpose the President has designated
(name) as his personal representative to lead the delegation of members
of the Executive and Legislative Branches of the American Government
who will return the Crown. (Para) The return of the Crown will take
place in Budapest at (time and venue), (name), personal representative
of the President of the Presidential Council of the Hungarian People’s
Republic, will head the group of distinguished Hungarians who will
receive the Crown. (Para) The Government of the Hungarian People’s
Republic will place the Crown of St. Stephen and the coronation regalia
on permanent public display in the (venue) at Budapest for Hungarians
everywhere and foreigners alike to see. Unquote.
6. Leaders of the American-Hungarian Federation have informed
Ambassador Esztergalyos that Hungarian-American opposition to the
return of the Crown could be reduced were the GOH to make some
gesture(s) to Hungarians abroad, such as letting it be known that an
amnesty has been declared for political prisoners in Hungary and that
any Hungarian abroad would be granted a visa to see the Crown.
While these two ideas are not absolute requirements, we believe the
GOH should fully consider them and the kind of post-return relation-
ship they wish with Hungarians and persons of Hungarian descent
who reside outside Hungary.
7. Finally, we have heard vague rumors from the American-Hun-
garian community to the effect that the Hungarian regime may hold
on to the Crown and coronation regalia for a time, then transfer them
to the Soviets. While we do not set much store by these reports, we
would nevertheless appreciate Embassy’s views on the likelihood of
this development.
Vance

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
151.
Telegram From the Embassy in Hungary to the Department
of State1
3819. Subject: Crown of St Stephen. Ref: (A) Budapest 375 (B)
State 255571.2
1. FonMin Puja informed me today that, in response to his report
to the Hungarian Government of our last conversation, the government
has agreed with our plans for the return of the Crown. Puja said that
the government had agreed to the proposals we had outlined to him,
including a joint communique and pre-agreed statements at the
return ceremony.
2. Puja said that the government also agreed with our tentative
scheduling suggestions. He added that the Government of Hungary
would like to fix both the date and the name of the chief U.S. delegate
as soon as possible.
3. Finally, Puja asked me to meet with Deputy Minister Nagy
Nov 3 to arrange the details of the return. I, of course, agreed to do so.3
4. When Puja asked whether we could be more definite on specific
dates, I told him that for reasons not connected with the substantive
question of the return of the Crown, it is not possible for us at this
time to agree definitely on a date or to identify the chief U.S. delegate.
5. Comment: Puja was extremely pleased with developments. He
had secured in record time the approval of the government leaders for
our proposals before they left for Moscow last Saturday. He wants us
to work out the details as quickly as possible and we will be pressing
ahead on this. End comment.
6. Prior to meeting with Puja, the DCM and I met with Ambassador
Bartha to outline in greater detail the return scenario we envision. I
made to Bartha all rpt all the points in para 3 of State 255571 and gave
him the text of the suggested joint communique. I also emphasized to
him the importance of the opinion of Hungarian-Americans and passed
to Bartha the suggestions for an amnesty and a public statement to the
effect that Hungarians abroad would be granted visas to see the Crown.
Secret; Immediate; Nodis.
see Document 150.
conversation with Nagy and Bartha regarding additional details on the return of the
Crown of St. Stephen. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,

Hungary
I also sought assurances from Bartha concerning the permanent public
display of the Crown in Budapest. For obvious reasons I was not as
specific as the language in para 3c of reftel concerning the date and
U.S. delegation head.
7. Bartha’s personal response was as follows. (He explained he must
now seek the government’s approval before he can respond officially.)
A. Place of return: Full agreement with U.S. plans.
B. U.S. delegation: Full agreement. Would appreciate concrete
information.
C. Date of return: Full agreement. Would appreciate confirmation.
D. Hungarian participants: Full agreement to participation of
Cardinal Private, Protestant leaders, and leaders of Jewish community.
He suggested representatives of women’s and youth organizations. We
told Bartha that we wanted as little party involvement as possible.
Bartha said he understood completely. He added that, for planning
purposes, there is no thought being given to attendance by any promi-
nent party leader.
E. Nature of public ceremony: Full agreement. Bartha said he does
not have government approval but he believes that Parliament is the
correct venue.
F. Permanent display: Bartha told me that the Crown will be dis-
played in a manner similar to the display of the British Crown Jewels
in London, with one exception: No admission will be charged. It is
the plan of the Hungarian Government to put the Crown on public
permanent display as soon as possible. In reply to my allusion to the
possibility that the Crown would be given to the Russians, Bartha
assured me in unequivocal terms that there is no such possibility:
“I can assure you that that question is utterly ridiculous. The Russians
have their own jewels. These jewels are treasured relics of the Hungar-
ian nation. We have been struggling for a long period to get them back.
We will not now give them away. In fact, we have a law which requires
that the Crown remain in Hungary.” In reply to question from DCM,
Bartha stated that this law is still in force. He agreed specifically to
our reporting these assurances to Washington.
G. Media participation: Full agreement with participation by
foreign and domestic (press, radio, television) media representatives.
H. Joint communique: I gave Bartha the text of our joint commu-
nique and Bartha agreed with its thrust. He or Nagy may suggest some
change in the wording.
I. Remarks at return ceremony: Bartha thought, on a personal basis,
that the remarks should be short. They should give a brief historical
background of the Crown and allude to its role in the future as a factor
in improved bilateral relations.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
8. Bartha assured me that Hungarians from all over the world
would be welcome in Hungary to view the Crown. He said there were
no political prisoners in Hungary so the question of a political amnesty
is difficult. Bartha said that the Government of Hungary looks upon
the Crown’s return and its continued presence in Budapest as a gesture
to build bridges among Hungarians throughout the world.
9. Bartha stressed the importance of fixing a date. He said our
timing is good and the Hungarian Government would like to effect
the return before Christmas.
10. Comment: We now have all elements of our maximum position
on the table and a favorable reaction to them from the Hungarian
working level. We also have an official favorable response to our plans
from the highest level of the Government of Hungary.
11. The last step is official approval of our specific scenario. We
foresee no major problem in obtaining it after we have reviewed the
details with Nagy.
12. It seems clear that the Hungarian Government is willing to do
everything it can to meet our requirements, and that it would welcome
a visit by a high-ranking U.S. official in connection with the Crown’s
return. It would be most helpful if we could fix the date and chief U.S.
delegate as soon as possible. If it becomes necessary to change the
President’s travel plans, and therefore our present plans for returning
the Crown, would it be possible for a major figure in the administration,
such as the Secretary, to schedule a brief stop in Budapest some time
before Christmas in connection with travel to Europe for some other
reason, such as the NATO Ministerial?
Kaiser
152.
Editorial Note
The decision to return the Crown of St. Stephen to Hungary leaked
quickly within the administration of President Jimmy Carter. On
November 1, 1977, Robert R. King of the National Security Council
Staff reported to Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
Zbigniew Brzezinski that employees of the United States Information
Agency already knew of the decision, and that the decision was perhaps
even more widely known throughout the United States Government.
(Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Europe, USSR,
and East/West, Hunter Subject File, Box 14, Hungary: Crown of St.
Stephen: 11/77) Concerned that the information would soon leak to the

Hungary
press and prompt a negative reaction in Congress, King recommended
making a preemptive announcement of the decision to return the
Crown. (Ibid.) Administration officials informed congressional leaders
and concerned members of Congress of the decision to return the
Crown on November 3. (National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Secre-
tariat Staff, Mr. Matthew Nimetz, Counselor of the Department of
State, Under Secretary of State for Security Assistance, Science and
ning Reading)
Following notification by administration officials, Representative
Mary Rose Oakar (Democrat-Ohio) wrote to President Carter to express
her “deep sorrow and disappointment” at the decision to return the
Crown and urged him to re-consider. Oakar cited the “tremendous
religious and national significance that the Crown has for the people
of Hungary,” and claimed that many members of the Hungarian-Amer-
ican community were vehemently opposed to the Crown’s return. She
further argued that returning it to the Communist regime contradicted
the administration’s stated aim of promoting human rights. Raising
questions about the administration’s handling of the matter, Represent-
ative Oakar urged Carter to reconsider his decision. (Carter Library,
Liaison, responded to Oakar on behalf of the President on November
7, indicating that the President would take her comments into consider-
ation. (Ibid.)
The House Subcommittee on Europe and the Middle East, chaired
by Representative Lee Hamilton (Democrat-Indiana) held a special
hearing on the Crown of St. Stephen and United States-Hungarian
relations on November 9. International Relations Committee Chairman
Clement J. Zablocki (Democrat-Wisconsin), also participated in the
hearing. Representatives Oakar and Frank Horton (Republican-New
York) and representatives from several Hungarian-American organiza-
tions testified against the President’s decision. Representative Oakar
called on Congress to conduct an investigation and urged adoption of
H.R. 7983, a bill that would prohibit the return of the Crown without
explicit congressional approval. Counselor of the Department of State
Matthew Nimetz testified on behalf of the administration. During the
hearing, former Hungarian Prime Minister Ferenc Nagy and General
Béla Kiraly—the commander of the Hungarian National Guard during
the 1956 Revolution—supported the President’s decision. Since “emo-
tions ran high” neither Hamilton nor Zablocki wanted to pursue the
matter, Nimetz wrote Secretary of State Vance in a November 9 Evening
Report after the hearing. Nimitz also reported that he had assured
Zablocki he would be consulted about the details of the return.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
(National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Mr. Matthew
Nimetz, Counselor of the Department of State, Under Secretary of State
for Security Assistance, Science and Technology, January 1977 thru
Vice President Walter Mondale met with Representative Oakar
and a group of Hungarian-Americans on November 9 in the Roosevelt
Room at the White House. President Carter also “dropped in.” (Carter
Library, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary) No record of
the conversation was found, but in the prepared talking points for the
meeting, Brzezinski suggested that Carter stress the decision “was
made on the basis of the marked improvement in Hungarian American
relations” and “Hungary has a good record of implementing the provi-
sions of the Helsinki Final Act.” (Carter Library, National Security
Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Country Chron File,
10 that she would “continue to work with the Hungarian people and
draw up a list of conditions you requested,” conditions under which
Oakar and Hungarian-American organizations would support the
return of the Crown. (Carter Library, White House Central Files, Coun-
wrote the President again, stating that return of the Crown should only
take place after withdrawal of Soviet troops stationed in Hungary
and the holding of free elections. Oakar emphasized that Hungarian-
American organizations would “oppose vigorously” any return that
is based on lesser conditions. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs,
Staff Material, Europe, USSR, and East/West, Hunter Subject File, Box

Hungary
153.
Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant
(Jordan) to President Carter1
Washington, undated
RE
RETURN OF THE CROWN TO HUNGARY
I hope that you will review the attached memorandum from Pat
Caddell.2
I have checked around on the support for the return of the Crown
as well as the opposition to it. There is no way to discern scientifically
how Hungarian Americans feel about this issue. But basically, my
feeling is that those who have feelings about it oppose the return of
the Crown overwhelmingly. Former government officials and educated
Hungarians may have a more enlightened view of this matter, but the
average Hungarian American is opposed to this action because the
alleged benefit to the people of Hungary has not been explained and
is difficult to explain. Their reaction to our return of the Crown is emotional
and not an enlightened view. I wish you could have stayed at the meeting
to hear the former Mayor of Budapest describe what the Crown means
to him.3 It was emotional and very touching.
We mislead ourselves to think that the Hungarian-American com-
munity is closely divided on this issue. It is not. If it were, you would
not have had members of Congress and the leaders of all of the Captive
Nation organizations protesting this decision.
It is one thing for us to suffer domestically with a group of people
in pursuit of a major policy that is important to us and the world (the
Mideast, for example). It is quite another for us to suffer politically
for an action that has very little—if any—redeeming features. We are
alienating the Hungarian community in this country in hopes of gaining
Box 34B, Hungary—Crown of St. Stephen. Personal and Confidential. Carter initialed
the memorandum indicating that he saw it.
2 Dated November 9, attached but not printed. The memorandum is not from Pat
Cadell, but from John Gorman of Cambridge Survey Research and analyzes the effect
of voters from East European backgrounds. A 20-point swing in Carter’s favor, Gorman
wrote, would have given Carter a win in California, Illinois, and New Jersey. A swing
in the other direction would have cost Carter New York, Ohio, Pennsylvania, and
Wisconsin. The survey concluded that “without the significant support of East European
voters in the 1976 election Jimmy Carter would not have been elected President.” Jordan
also forwarded the attached memorandum to Brzezinski. (Ibid.)
3 See Document 152.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
some intangible benefit from the Communist regime in Hungary. The political
trade-offs do not seem acceptable to me.
Our policy in the Middle East has cost us the support of American
Jews in states like New York, California and Florida. The Panama Canal
treaty has hurt us in the South with conservatives. I would argue that
these issues are worth the political costs.
But now, we have hurt ourselves in the industrial states of the
Midwest through an action that has very little benefit. We have taken
a position on an emotional issue that will cost us dearly in the future
with Hungarian-Americans and other Eastern European groups. These
people who are immigrants and the families of immigrants will not
forget easily or quickly what we have done.
With the Panama Canal treaty upcoming and the prospects for a
SALT II treaty good, it seems ridiculous to sacrifice the moral and
political authority of your Presidency for such an issue. We should
husband our political capital and spend it sparingly and wisely. At a
time when we are low in the polls and involved in many important
controversial issues, we have expended our political capital unwisely
on this issue.
You have so many things to do and many pressures on you. I hate
to present this problem to you in such a way, but if the people responsi-
ble for your foreign policy decisions don’t develop some political sensi-
tivity, we are going to be in trouble on the big issues that matter.

Hungary
154.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to Secretary of State Vance1
Washington, November 18, 1977
SUBJECT
Hungarian-Americans’ Suggestions on the Return of the Crown
I met yesterday afternoon with a group of Hungarian-Americans
to discuss the Crown of St. Stephen.2 Although they had reservations
on its return, they offered suggestions on the manner in which it could
be transferred that would help minimize the negative repercussions
and maximize the positive impact. A number of their suggestions have
already been included in the original scenario, but others are new and
would be useful for us to consider. Following is a summary of all their
comments.
1. That steps be taken to strengthen human rights in Hungary.
Among the items of concern here are increased freedom for the religious
press, restoration of religious orders, release of any imprisoned clergy,
and granting licenses to clergy who have been denied them in the past.
The group suggested asking the Hungarian Government to declare
amnesty for those who left Hungary for non-criminal reasons, or who
were convicted on political and religious grounds.
2. That the Hungarian churches play a role in the presentation and
guarding of the Crown and that religious symbolism be maintained.
3. That there be free and open access to the Crown.
4. That people-to-people aspect be emphasized in the return. The
group suggests that the US delegation include a broad representation
of Americans and that the role of Government officials be minimized.
5. That the Crown be exhibited in the US prior to its return to
Hungary.
I realize that many of these items have already been taken into
consideration, but you might consider the new ones in revising the
scenario. Some of the suggestions may be difficult or unwise to include.
2 Brzezinski actually met with leaders of the Hungarian-American community on
dum, forwarded by King for signature on November 16. In the last paragraph, Brzezinski
added a period after the word “scenario” and took out the third line which read “as
the President requested, timing the return to take place at the end of his visit to
Europe.” (Ibid.)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
The proposal to display the Crown here before its return should be
given consideration, and I would appreciate your reactions.3
Zbigniew Brzezinski
3 See Document 156.
155.
Memorandum From the Counselor of the Department of
State (Nimetz) to Secretary of State Vance1
Washington, November 23, 1977
SUBJECT
Crown of St. Stephen
We should now make a firm decision on the date for the Crown’s
return and, if possible, the head of the delegation. The reasons for my
recommendation are as follows:
—We need about two weeks to carry out necessary technical prepa-
rations for delivering the Crown (the examination of the items by
National Gallery experts will take place next week at Fort Knox). The
Hungarians need time for their preparations.
—Lee Hamilton is coming under pressure from Congresswoman
Oakar for a vote on her bill when Congress returns next week. He can
easily defeat the bill in sub-committee, but prefers to dispose of it
without a vote. He has asked us to announce a date and a head of
delegation by Wednesday to counteract this pressure. We should help
Hamilton and Zablocki by removing the heat from them.
—As we continue to delay an announcement on the timing and
circumstances of return, Hungarian-American groups have more
opportunity to protest our decision and possibly embarrass the
Administration.
Nimetz, Counselor of the Department of State, Under Secretary of State for Security
1, MN Chron—Official, July–December 1977. Confidential; Exdis.

Hungary
We have spoken to the U.S. Catholic Conference leadership and
hope to have some expression of support from them. (Separate memo
will follow on this.2 ) In addition, we are trying to stimulate a positive
statement from the Vatican.3
For these reasons, as well as the President’s most recent written
comment that he did not want to return the Crown timidly, I believe
we should seek a White House decision on the date—whether it be in
December or January.
2 In a memorandum to Vance dated November 23, Nimetz reported his conversation
earlier that day with Father Brian Hehir and Ed Doherty of the International Affairs
Office of the U.S. Catholic Conference. (Ibid.) On November 29, Hehir and Doherty
returned to discuss their effort to obtain a positive statement from the church. Nimetz
reported: “Although Hehir had earlier assured me that he would be able to obtain this
support, in a poll of key Catholic Bishops, completed this afternoon, the majority opposed
the issuance of a strong supportive statement. Father Hehir was apologetic, but indicated
that the lobbying against support was strong, whereas there is no lobby in the Church
favoring return.” (Ibid.)
3 On November 11, Brzezinski wrote Vance: “Just a reminder arising out of this
morning’s breakfast: Could you initiate efforts to obtain Papal approval in some overt
form for the initiative on the Hungarian crown.” (Carter Library, National Security
Affairs, Staff Material, Europe, USSR, and East/West, Hunter Subject File, Box 14, Hun-
gary: Crown of St. Stephen: 11/77)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
156.
Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance to the
President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs
(Brzezinski)1
Washington, November 29, 1977
SUBJECT
Hungarian-Americans’ Suggestions on the Return of the Crown
We are sympathetic to several of the suggestions from the group
of Hungarian-Americans described in your memorandum to me of
November 18.2
Our reactions to the specific comments made to you are as follows:
1. Take Steps to Strengthen Human Rights in Hungary
We are taking a close look at the state of religious freedom in
Hungary and will prepare an unclassified summary study of use to
interested Americans. We will also be asking Embassy Budapest to
seek clarification from the Hungarian Government on questions which
have been raised here relating to freedom of religion.
During Phil Kaiser’s initial discussions with the Hungarian
Government on the Crown,3 he commended for Hungarian considera-
tion the July suggestion of some Hungarian-American leaders to the
Hungarian Ambassador that a general amnesty for political prisoners
would generate more support here for return of the Crown. The
Hungarians replied that they have no political prisoners (we have been
unable to identify any) and that the question of such an amnesty was
thus difficult. However, they did not reject the idea.
2. Role of Hungarian Churches in the Crown’s Return
It has been an essential condition throughout our discussions with
the Hungarian Government that the Crown be received by a delegation
broadly representative of the Hungarian people and that it include
prominent religious leaders of the Catholic, Protestant and Jewish
faiths, including the Cardinal Primate. The Hungarian Government
readily accepted these suggestions and has assured us that the Cardinal
Secret; Exdis. Printed from an uninitialed copy. King forwarded the memorandum to
Brzezinski under a December 1 covering memorandum. (Ibid.)
2 See Document 154.
ment 146.

Hungary
Primate will be invited to be an active participant in the ceremony of
return. They have also added that no thought is being given to attend-
ance by any prominent Party leaders. The Hungarian Government has
also assured us that the Crown will be treated in a manner fitting to
its national, cultural and religious symbolism.
As to the question of a church role in guarding the Crown, ever
since enactment of a Hungarian law in 1498 during the reign of King
Laszlo II, custody of the Crown has rested solely with non-ecclesiastical
persons. In July 1976, Cardinal Lekai, the Primate of Hungary, informed
our Charge that the Catholic Church in Hungary would very much
welcome the return of the Crown, which he considered to be the coun-
try’s most precious symbol. He added that both the Church and the
State were carefully preserving and restoring Hungary’s historical
treasures and that the historical past of the country would be respected,
taught and studied. While the Hungarian Government may consult
the Hungarian churches concerning the presentation and guarding of
the Crown, we believe that this matter is best left for discussion between
the Hungarian Government and the various Hungarian church
organizations.
3. Free Access to the Crown
The Hungarian Government has assured us, at the highest levels,
that the Crown will be promptly placed on permanent exhibition in
an appropriate historical location in Budapest and that the population
of Hungary, Hungarians everywhere and foreigners alike, will be wel-
come to view it. Such open, permanent display will be in marked
contrast to past practice, which provided for only rare public display
of the Crown.
4. Emphasize the People-to-People Aspect of the Return
We fully agree that the “people-to-people” aspect of return is very
important. The Hungarian Government appears to have accepted our
suggestion in this respect without reservation. We believe that the US
delegation should include prominent Americans from various walks
of life.
With regard to the suggestion that the role of US Government
officials be minimized, we believe that Members of Congress, as elected
representatives of the American people, should be included in the
delegation along with at least several Executive Branch representatives
and that full consideration must be given to a Government official as
the delegation head. Tip O’Neill wrote me strongly suggesting that
House members be included. The US Catholic Conference of Bishops
has asked whether they might make some suggestions for the
delegation.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
5. Exhibit the Crown in the US Before Return
While there may appear to be certain domestic benefits in placing
the Crown on public display here prior to its return, we believe that
it would not be in the interest of the United States to do so.
Public display of the Crown at one or more locations in the United
States would:
—be inconsistent with our longstanding policy of denying the use
of the Crown in the United States for any public purpose;
—upset the Hungarian people and government, both of which
deny our right to display it;
—precipitate renewed media interest and possible demonstrations
against the return;
—increase the chances for accidental or intentional damage to the
Crown and regalia;
—detract from the drama and impact of the ceremony of return
in Budapest; and
—from a legal standpoint, require the concurrence of the Hungar-
ian Government and resolution of the question of indemnity.
We also understand that the Vice President has expressed objec-
tions to the idea of public display in the United States and that President
Mellon of the National Gallery of Art told J. Carter Brown that he did
not want the Gallery to display the Crown.
Moreover, to demonstrate more fully our interest in the expressed
concerns of American Catholics, I will be meeting during the week of
November 28 with officials of the National Conference of Bishops4 and
Phil Kaiser will call on Cardinal Lekai.5
with Cardinal Lekai the day before. Lekai asked Kaiser to report to Washington that
“I support the return of the Crown, the Catholic Church supports the return of the
Crown, and the Hungarian people support the return of the Crown.” (National Archives,

Hungary
157.
Memorandum From Robert King of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, December 1, 1977
SUBJECT
Secretary Vance’s Intention to Raise the Crown of St. Stephen at Breakfast
Tomorrow
According to the staff of State Department Counselor Matt Nimetz,
Secretary Vance plans to raise the Crown at your breakfast meeting
tomorrow at which time he will bring with him a memo in response
to your memo to him of November 30 (Tab A) asking for written
assurances from the Hungarian government regarding permanent dis-
play of the Crown and the question of religious participation in the
return ceremony.2
Vance’s response to your memo will be along the following lines:
—The Hungarian government has already given us high level
assurances (both before and after we informed them of the decision to
return the Crown) that the Crown will be placed on permanent display.3
Although these assurances were given orally to our ambassador in
Budapest, the Hungarian government has taken steps to implement
them and is now considering two possible sites for permanent display.
We have proposed, and the Hungarians have agreed in principle, that
a joint statement will be issued4 when the decision to return the Crown
is publicly announced which specifies that the Crown will be placed
on permanent public display. Since the Hungarians will commit them-
on the memorandum and noted “he did” in the upper right corner, indicating that Vance
had raised the issue with the President at the breakfast meeting. According to the
President’s Daily Diary, Carter met with Mondale, Vance, and Brzezinski from 7:30 to
No substantive record of that meeting was found.
2 Attached but not printed. Brzezinski notified Vance: “The President would appreci-
ate an update regarding the assurances we are seeking from the Hungarians. He requests
that these assurances be in writing, and that they cover—among other items—the issue
of the permanent display of the Crown and the question of the nature and scope of
religious participation in the return ceremony.”
3 Brzezinski wrote in the margin next to this paragraph: “We want them in writing.”
4 On December 15, the Department of State released the Joint Communiqué and
the exchange of letters between Kaiser and Puja detailing the understanding reached
by the two governments on the return of the Crown. For the full text, see Department

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
selves in this joint statement, requesting confirmation in writing would
be undiplomatic and unnecessary.
—The U.S. proposals on the ceremony for transfer of the Crown
call for participation of representatives of Hungarian religious groups,
including the Cardinal, and the Hungarian government has accepted
these proposals. Ambassador Kaiser met with Cardinal Lekai just a
few days ago and confirmed to him our desire that he participate in
the ceremony and he affirmed his willingness and intention to do so
(see report of this meeting at Tab B).5 The Vatican has informed the
Cardinal that it considers the return of the Crown to be a bilateral affair
between the U.S. and Hungary and expressed its disinterestedness and
neutrality on the question. While Lekai expressed his willingness to
issue a statement or write an article in a Hungarian Catholic publication
welcoming the return of the Crown, it is unlikely that we will get any
kind of public statement from the Vatican or the American Catholic
Conference (see Ambassador Kaiser’s cable about approaching the Vati-
can for a statement at Tab C).6
Vance reportedly plans to propose that we fix January 7th as the
date for the return of the Crown and request concurrence from the
Hungarian government. Once the date has been agreed upon, a public
announcement should be issued. The arguments for this course are:
(1) to prevent public speculation that the President has reconsidered
his decision to return the Crown; (2) to help Congressmen Zablocki
and Hamilton who are being pressed by Congresswoman Oakar to
bring to a vote her resolution requiring Congressional approval of any
decision to return the Crown. If the President’s decision is announced,
they can argue that it is too late for Congressional action.
I agree with this position. The public announcement that the Crown
will be returned on a specific date will close the issue. The longer we
postpone an announcement of the date, the more it will encourage
opposition on the grounds that the White House is undecided or has
backtracked because of public reaction. This is the time for a bold
step—we should not return the Crown timidly.
Security Affairs, Staff Material, Europe, USSR, and East/West, Hunter Subject File, Box

Hungary
158.
Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance to President
Carter1
Washington, December 1, 1977
SUBJECT
The Crown of St. Stephen
You have asked us for an update of the written assurances we are
seeking from the Hungarians in connection with the return of the
Crown.2 I can report that they have agreed to our proposal for a joint
communique in the name of the two Presidents.3 It will specify what
the Hungarians have agreed to do with respect to the public ceremony,
permanent public display of the Crown, and concerning foreigners
who wish to return to Hungary to see the Crown. The Hungarian
Government’s acceptance of the communique will serve as a written
guarantee of these essential elements.
Concerning the nature and scope of religious participation in the
return ceremony, the Hungarian Government has assured us that lead-
ing Hungarian religious figures will be included in the ceremony.
The Hungarian Cardinal told us this week that he will be an active
participant. Senior Foreign Ministry officials have expressed agreement
to our request that Hungarian Protestant church leaders and leaders
of the Jewish community also participate in the ceremony.
I believe it is both appropriate and important that we now set a
firm date for the return of the Hungarian Crown. Further delay could
allow the political climate to become worse:
—Clem Zablocki and Lee Hamilton have been urging us to return
the Crown at the earliest possible date. They were helpful at the
hearings on the Crown, and Hamilton is trying to avoid a formal vote
in his European sub-committee on Congresswoman Oakar’s bill
against the return. Even though her bill would be defeated, a vote
could be embarrassing for the Administration and politically difficult
Secret; Nodis. Vest sent the memorandum to Vance under a covering memorandum
dated December 1. (National Archives, RG 59, Bureau of European Affairs, Office of
Eastern Europe and Yugoslavia, Hungarian Holy Crown—Crown Follow Up 1979 and
informed him of the Hungarian Government’s agreement to issue a joint communiqué
as part of the ceremony for the return of the Crown. (National Archives, RG 59, Central
Foreign Policy File, D770422–0676)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
for Hamilton and others. Hamilton has told us that announcement of
a date will allow him to head off this vote.
—Only Congresswoman Oakar (and Congressman Horton to a
lesser degree) is still actively opposing your decision. Oakar is alleging
that the Administration is even reconsidering its decision to return the
Crown. Many influential Senators and Congressmen have publicly
supported your decision and expect us to act promptly and assertively
on this. (These include Humphrey, McGovern, Griffin, Pell, Biden,
Charley Wilson, Vanik, Bingham, Whalen, Frenzel and Fenwick.)
—Cardinal Lekai of Hungary has given us his strong support and
will issue a public statement. He told Ambassador Kaiser the following:
“I support the return of the Crown, the Catholic Church supports the
return of the Crown, and the Hungarian people support the return of
the Crown.”4 However, the Vatican and the US Catholic Conference
are not willing to issue supportive statements, and there is no advantage
in waiting any longer for them.5
—Setting a date now would not only defuse the opposition but
would allow us to get started on choosing a delegation (Tip O’Neill
has written me already about Congressional involvement) and on the
technical steps both here and in Budapest.
Therefore, I recommend that we return the Crown on January 7,
the day after your visit to Brussels. One or more members of your
party could go to Budapest for the ceremony, meeting the rest of the
US delegation there. If you approve, we will inform the Hungarian
Government that we are prepared to return the Crown on January 7,
subject to agreement on a joint statement6 (draft attached).7
6 In a memorandum dated December 2, Brzezinski forwarded Vance’s proposals
for Presidential approval. Carter approved the January 7, 1978, date for the return
and approved Brzezinski’s recommendation that Vance seek more specific assurances,
“perhaps through an exchange of letters” on the handling of the return and display of
the Crown. Carter wrote in the margin “a) We should consider Jan 6th also (same day
I’m in Brussels); b) Will they agree that Cadinal Lekai will participate in accepting
Crown? (in statement); c) Date of proposed announcement?” (Carter Library, National
forwarded Carter’s second and third comments to Vance in a December 2 memorandum.
(Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Europe, USSR, and East/West,
7 Attached but not printed. For the final text, see Department of State Bulletin,

Hungary
159.
Telegram From the Embassy in Hungary to the Department
of State1
1. Summary: During an hour and fifty minutes meeting at Party
headquarters December 8 with First Secretary Janos Kadar a wide range
of subjects was covered, including the state of our bilateral relations,
the President’s decision to return the Crown, Hungary’s economy and
MFN, and the prospect for widening Hungarian-American contacts.
End summary.
2. After going through the pleasantries of how I was finding Buda-
pest and whether my family was here with me, Kadar warmly wel-
comed me as the new U.S. Ambassador to Hungary.3 He commented
that the role of an Ambassador was significant because it was through
his eyes that his home country saw Hungary’s society. It was essential,
therefore, for Ambassadors to be as objective as possible and to report
fully and frankly. He, Kadar, put a premium on a realistic approach
to both international and domestic affairs.
3. Kadar then expressed his satisfaction over the improved state
of our relations at which point I read the oral message from the Presi-
dent.4 He was grateful for the message and used it as his lead for a
lengthy exposition on Hungarian policies and attitudes which lasted
for over an hour (including interpretation).
4. He started by noting that although Hungary was a member of
one alliance and the United States the leader of another, that did not
mean that effective and meaningful bilateral relations should not be
Secret; Exdis.
his meeting with Kadar. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770455–
the day before and their discussions on MFN. See footnote 3, Document 149.
3 For Kaiser’s personal recollection of the content and atmosphere at the meeting,
see his memoirs, Journey Far and Wide, pp. 287–290.
4 On December 7, Brzezinski approved on Carter’s behalf the following oral message:
“I wish to take this opportunity to express my satisfaction at the recent positive develop-
ments in relations between our two countries and peoples. It is my desire and intention
to continue building on these relations to the mutual benefit of our peoples and in
support of those principles and goals embodied in the Final Act of the Conference on
Security and Cooperation in Europe.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff
Material, Europe, USSR, and East/West, Hunter Subject File, Box 14, Hungary, Crown
of St. Stephen 12/77) The text was transmitted as part of the instructions in telegram
292670 to Budapest. See footnote 2 above.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
developed. He wanted to make clear that Hungary was an independent
country with its own domestic and international policies although, of
course, it was loyal to its alliances. He always read with amusement
stories that said that while Hungary was a “satellite” on international
affairs, it was freer domestically where its policies were more liberal
than any other Eastern European country. Hungary had its own tradi-
tions, history and culture with its own national interests. These factors,
plus the “size of our country, our location on the map and the nature of
our economy” were the main criteria in the international and domestic
policies that Hungary pursued.
5. He then spoke at great length about the Hungarian economy,
stressing that it was by far the most important aspect of Hungarian
life today. He is pleased with the progress that had been made and is
determined that this progress continue. This depended, he pointed
out, on expanding the country’s foreign trade. Forty-five percent of
Hungary’s GNP derived from that trade and it had to be increased if
the standard of living was to be raised. For every increase of one
percent in GNP, Hungary required a one and a half percent increase
in exports. At present, Hungary’s foreign trade was divided roughly
sixty percent with the East and forty percent with the West and for
the foreseeable future that was probably the right proportion. The main
Western trading partners were the traditional ones: Germany, Italy
and Austria. American trade, unfortunately, was “just a trickle” and
he hoped that situation could be changed.
6. He talked at some length about the unfairness of the lack of
MFN and the inhibiting effect it is having on our future relations,
although he was pleased that several joint enterprises with American
companies had been launched and others were in the planning stage.
He saw no ideological obstacle to this kind of collaboration because
Hungarian industrial
enterprises were
practically independent.”
More than once he stressed that the most important political element
to Hungarian life was the way in which it handled its economic
development.
7. He then turned to a once-over-lightly review of Hungarian-
American relations since World War I, ending up with the story of the
Crown. He understood fully, he said that successful bilateral relations
depended on mutual understanding of the differences in the domestic
policies and attitudes of the two countries involved. Whereas for the
Hungarians the issue of the Crown was simple—Hungarian people
knew it belonged to them—he realized why it was more complicated
for the Americans. He very much appreciated the President’s decision
to return the Crown. He said that he was always confident that this
issue would be resolved one day because we had succeeded in resolving
the more complicated Mindszenty issue. He particularly understood

Hungary
and agreed with the President’s emphasis on the fact that the return
of the Crown was a people-to-people act. The Hungarians were ready
to receive it in this spirit. When I broke in to urge him to clear the
communique and the letter we had proposed as rapidly as possible,
he said that although we both desired quick action, “the Hungarian
Government also had its procedures” and therefore it might be early
Ambassador Bartha told me later in the day that after my meeting with
Kadar the latter had phoned the Foreign Ministry to press them on
the two documents.)
8. He then asked me to tell President Carter that he appreciated
the oral message and had no difficulty in being responsive to it. The
Helsinki Accords provided a basis for improved relations among all
the signatory countries and the Hungarians had found its provisions
compatible with their own historical experience and outlook on life.
They mean to continue to implement those provisions in reasonable
order.
9. He concluded his remarks by recalling his meeting in Moscow
with Governor Harriman in 1963 when the Governor was there to sign
the Test Ban Treaty. He remembered in great detail that evening at the
sports stadium when Harriman came in with Khrushchev and was
introduced to Kadar. He mentioned his discussion with Harriman
on the Mindszenty issue and the Hungarian position at the United
Nations.5 He spoke warmly of the Governor, stating no man under-
stood East-West relations better than he and asked me to convey his
greetings to him.
10. After quipping that I could report that the Governor’s story of
that evening in Moscow coincided on every detail with Kadar’s own,
I responded to the main points he had raised.
11. I pointed out first of all the significance of the President’s
decision on the Crown. It was not only right morally but it was an act
of political courage and explained why. I mentioned too that both the
President and Secretary Vance had always recognized that the Crown
was Hungarian property and that in spite of some domestic opposition
felt that the time had come to return it to the Hungarian people. I said
that this act reflected the President’s general approach to East-West
relations and spelled out the points made in State 292670: That the
President was committed “to cooperation and not confrontation,” as
evidenced by his determination to reach a SALT Agreement, to pursue
MBFR to a successful conclusion and to prevent proliferation of nuclear
XVI, Eastern Europe; Cyprus; Greece; Turkey, footnote 4, Document 28.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
weapons. Because of the President’s technical knowledge of the nuclear
problem no Chief of State had a better appreciation of the full signifi-
cance of the nuclear threat. I pointed out that Averell Harriman and
Marshall Shulman typified the kind of advisers that the President had
on Soviet-American relations, and emphasized that Secretary Vance
had long since been known for his constructive, moderate approach
to East-West relations. I suggested that if he hadn’t already done so,
Kadar should read the President’s Charleston speech6 to get a realistic
exposure to the President’s views on world affairs. He said he was
familiar with it.
12. In regard to MFN, I emphasized that the Executive Branch of
the government was in favor of granting it to Hungary, but we had
to meet the requirements of the 1974 Trade Act.7 We thought that this
could be done to the mutual advantage of both countries without
adversely affecting either nation’s self-esteem. As Kadar undoubtedly
knew, we had made our first proposal for meeting the political require-
ments of the act and we were waiting for the GOH’s response. We
hoped we could solve the political aspects of the matter fairly soon so
that we could proceed to negotiate a trade agreement. To my surprise,
he asked whether MFN was linked with the Crown. I made it clear
that there was no linkage. (Comment: I am puzzled by this question,
but perhaps it results from the fact that when we told Foreign Minister
Puja about the President’s decision to return the Crown we also made
our first proposal about MFN. Budapest 3749).8
13. I also commented on the importance of extending our bilateral
contacts. We were pleased with the cooperation between members of
our Embassy and officials of the Foreign Office and other government
departments. We would now like to develop similar relationships
with members of the Party. When Senators McGovern and Biden and
Counselor Nimetz were here they had a chance to talk with Mr. Gyenes
and Mr. Berecz, top Party officers, and this had proved very useful.
In fact, we had invited Mr. Berecz to visit the United States and we
hoped that he would be able to accept.
14. We also desired to increase our contacts between the private
individuals of our two countries and between organizations, particu-
larly in the fields of education, science and technology and culture.
I saw no reason why our exchanges should not be on a scale similar
meeting of the Southern Legislative Conference in Charleston, South Carolina, July 21.
Document 223.

Hungary
to those of Poland and the Soviet Union. His response was positive in
regard to all the above contacts and exchanges. He stated in his direct
simple way these “exchanges were reality.”
15. Finally, I said that in addition to bilateral issues, I hoped that
our dialogue would also deal with important international issues of
common interest. I recalled that when Secretary Vance had seen Foreign
Minister Puja in New York, the Secretary discussed at some length
Middle East developments and progress in the SALT negotiations, as
well as bilateral subjects.
16. Before the conversation ended, Kadar asked me again to be
sure and convey his appreciation to the President for the decision to
return the Crown and to emphasize that he foresaw increased coopera-
tion between our two countries. We could accomplish a great deal on
a realistic basis, he added. We could live normally with each other, and
we don’t have to announce our achievements in “bright neon lights.”
17. Comment: A. Although Kadar has the complexion of a man of
his actual years—it is slightly blotchy and puffy—the vigor of his
movements and the liveliness of his mind belie his age. He walks
with an attractive strut which reminds one of a confident athlete. He
articulated easily and with animation in spite of the fact that the only
other person present was a woman interpreter. This is in contrast with
his public speaking style which is apparently rather diffident. One is
struck by his poise. He has the dignity of a man who has gone through
severe trials and emerged on top, but has learned the appropriate
lessons from his earlier experience. He is a smoker. He consumed about
five cigarettes. Early in our meeting two scotch and sodas were brought
in which we imbibed at about the same speed in the course of our
conversation.
B. Perhaps the most striking aspect of our substantive discussion
was his emphasis on the economic side of Hungarian life. More than
once he referred to the political importance of Hungary’s economic
progress. There is not only pride in what has been achieved, but deter-
mination to effect a steady improvement in the standard of living. He
appreciates the fact that the achievement of this objective requires
important economic ties with the West.
Kaiser

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
160.
Editorial Note
At noon on December 15, 1977, the Department of State released
the text of the U.S.-Hungarian Joint Communiqué and exchange of
letters setting forth the understanding between the two governments
regarding the return of the Crown of St. Stephen. The day before, while
transmitting the final text agreed in Budapest, the Embassy reported:
“The communique contains the language we wanted on every point
which was discussed” and that the Hungarian Government would
“release the communique, Puja’s text, and the essential points of the
Ambassador’s letter. Reference to Cardinal Lekai’s participation will
be included in these points.” (Telegram 4319 from Budapest, December
0686)
Three days earlier, on December 12, Representative Mary Rose
Oakar wrote to Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
Zbigniew Brzezinski regarding media speculation on the return of
the Crown and complained she had received no reply to her Novem-
ber 29 letter to President Jimmy Carter outlining her conditions for
its return. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material,
Europe, USSR, and East/West, Hunter Subject File, Box 14, Hungary:
Crown of St Stephen: 12/77) Robert King of the National Security
Council Staff had received Representatives Oakar and Frank Horton on
November 29 and accepted a letter to the President outlining conditions
under which the return of the Crown would be deemed acceptable by
the Hungarian-American community. The two Representatives also
expressed their concern that Congress be informed of any decision
regarding the return of the Crown. King reported his meeting to Brze-
zinski in a November 29 memorandum. (Ibid.)
On December 15, the day of the official announcement of the return
of the Crown, Brzezinski wrote Oakar that the President’s “decision
to return the Crown of St Stephen to the Hungarian people has been
made on the basis that this important historic relic belongs to the
Hungarian nation. In making that decision he is fully aware of its
symbolism.” Brzezinski also outlined the conditions under which the
United States agreed to return the Crown, included in the Joint Commu-
niqué and exchange of letters. (Ibid.)

Hungary
161.
Letter from Representative Mary Rose Oakar to
President Carter1
Washington December 15, 1977
Dear Mr. President:
I am outraged by the State Department’s announcement today that
the Holy Crown of Saint Stephen will be returned to Hungary on
January 6th and 7th of next year. Deceit and deception have character-
ized the entire handling of this issue by your Administration. Just as
this decision shows gross insensitivity to the plight of the people in
Hungary, so the manner in which the issue has been handled shows
a total lack of concern for the millions in America and throughout the
world who feel so strongly about the Crown and object to its return.
On November 9, I, along with several other Members of Congress,
personally heard you tell the Hungarian-American leaders I brought
to the White House that you wanted them to list the conditions under
which they felt return of the Crown would be acceptable, and that you
would listen closely to what they had to say.2 Believing you to be a
man of your word, these men and women who represent thousands
of concerned citizens carefully and thoughtfully composed messages
to you on the conditions they felt should be imposed upon return of the
Crown. Also in response to your request, on November 29 I personally
delivered to your representative, Mr. Robert King of the National
Security Council staff, a letter to you in which I summed up the views on
the Crown that were unanimously expressed to me by the Hungarian-
American community.
I never received a reply to this letter from you.3 Because the Crown
was not returned during Secretary Vance’s trip to Europe in early
December as had originally been planned, I began to believe that you
were indeed going to listen to our views before making a final commit-
ment on the Crown. Earlier today, just an hour or two before the State
Department’s announcement, a member of my staff called Mr. King
to ask when I could expect to receive a reply to my letter. She was told
that no reply could be sent yet because the Hungarian government had
classification marking. A stamped notation on the letter indicates that it was received
at the White House Congressional Liaison Office on December 19. Hunter forwarded
the letter to Brzezinski under a December 20 covering memorandum, recommending
that, in light of his December 15 letter to Oakar, no response was necessary.
2 See Document 152.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
not yet replied to messages of the United States regarding conditions
for return of the Crown that you insisted upon. He said that my letter
thus could not be answered, because you did not have the information
needed to answer it.
About four hours later, at approximately two o’clock, I received by
special messenger from the State Department copies of correspondence
between the American Ambassador to Hungary and the Hungarian
Foreign Minister stating the very conditions that just a few hours ago
supposedly were not known. Just yesterday, George Boutin, an eco-
nomic officer of the Department of State, outright denied the news
account in the Washington Post calling for the Crown’s return on or
about January 7th and 8th. He said details on the Crown’s return still
had not been made between our two countries.
These statements, obviously, were false, and so apparently were
the statements you made concerning your desire to listen to and
consult with Hungarian-Americans on this issue. Hungarian-Ameri-
cans and others concerned about the safety of the Crown were never
consulted in the first place when, according to the State Department,
a review of U.S. policy on the Crown was undertaken during the
late spring and summer of this year. To my knowledge, no one
outside the Administration, even those who pointedly asked about
the Crown, was ever told that a review of this policy was underway.
It is clear that even the cryptic announcement made by the State
Department on November 3 would not have been made but for a
leak of the decision to the media.
It is also clear that since that announcement and our November 9
meeting, the Administration has conducted what amounts to an elabo-
rate charade, speaking in terms of concern for the views of those
opposed to return of the Crown, but going ahead with your plans as
if we did not exist. While you were under no obligation to accept the
views we offered, you could have kept your word and at least listened,
and you could have at least provided us with truthful answers to our
questions. The events of today show that you did neither. For the
second time in a little over a month, I have, as a Member of Congress,
heard of an important Administration decision on a matter on which
I repeatedly expressed great concern, from a State Department function-
ary after members of the press had the same information. And in both
instances, the substance of the message was contrary to what I had
been told repeatedly by the Administration on earlier occasions.
To me, this is a very sad day for our country and for all of the
oppressed people of the world. I had fully supported the human rights
policy you enunciated at the beginning of your Administration, believ-
ing it to be consistent with the highest traditions of American foreign
policy. Now, it is clear that your human rights policy is nothing more

Hungary
than empty rhetoric, and freedom loving people everywhere today feel
the pain of this realization.
Sincerely,
Mary Rose Oakar
162.
Telegram From the Embassy in Hungary to the Department
of State1
105. Subject: SecState Visit—Secretary-FonMin Meeting Jan 7.
Uncleared Memcon of the Secretary’s Meeting With FonMin Puja.
Begin summary: The Secretary and FonMin Puja discussed emigra-
tion assurances and MFN; the favorable effect the return of the Crown
will have on bilateral relations; and other current topics in bilateral
relations (property settlement and cultural exchanges). The Secretary
also briefed Puja on the Middle East and the two exchanged views on
the Belgrade CSCE meeting, MBFR, and East-West relations in general.
The Secretary invited Puja to visit him in Washington if Puja comes
to New York for the Special Session on Disarmament. Puja extended
an invitation to the Secretary for an official visit to Budapest. End
summary.
1. Secretary Vance and FonMin Puja met for one hour Jan 7. Addi-
tional Hungarian participants: Deputy Minister Nagy; Ambassador
Esztergalyos; Office Director Bartha, and American Desk Officer
Revesz. U.S.: Ambassador Kaiser, Counselor Nimetz, Luers, King,
and Wilgis.
2. The Crown: Puja thanked the Secretary for the important role
he had played in the President’s decision to return the Crown. He said
that it was a courageous step which would give further momentum to
U.S.-Hungarian relations in that it eliminated a long-standing obstacle.
Hungary is ready to develop bilateral relations, and the fact that it is
a small country while the U.S. is a world power does not exclude good
relations. Cooperation is not only possible, but a necessity, and will
Confidential; Exdis; Immediate. A summary of the return ceremonies was transmitted
Policy File, D780021–1184)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
serve the cause of peace in general. The Secretary informed Puja that
the press coverage of the Crown’s return in the U.S. had been both
positive and extensive. The return is a real step forward in public
perception of the state of bilateral relations. It will facilitate further
steps, which the USG is prepared to take.
3. MFN: Puja referred to the Hungarian proposed language of
Dec 16,2 as well as the Hungarian procedural proposal.3 From the U.S.
reply it can be seen that both sides take a positive approach on the
question of emigration assurances and the two positions are growing
closer. As to procedure, the GOH agrees to exchange letters on assur-
ances, as long as the exchange of letters deals not only with MFN but
also with other issues. The GOH is prepared to table a draft, in which
reference would be made to the Secretary’s visit and other issues. While
the competent authorities still must be consulted on the question of
publication of the letters, Puja personally had no objection. On the
assurances themselves, Puja referred to the U.S. insertion of the Univer-
sal Declaration on Human Rights (UDHR) into the Hungarian lan-
guage. Puja noted that this Declaration was adopted by the UN in
1948, when Hungary was not a member. Those Socialist countries who
were members abstained. In light of this history, the GOH would prefer
to refer to a more recent document, such as the Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights. Hungary has ratified and signed the Covenant; the
U.S. has signed but not ratified. In that this Covenant refers to the
UDHR, the GOH hopes its use would present a practical solution.
4. In reply the Secretary agreed that an exchange of letters between
Ambassador Kaiser and the Foreign Minister covering the assurances
would be an acceptable way to proceed. He personally thought that
references to additional subjects would be satisfactory and he would
2 In order for Hungary to receive MFN, the administration sought to receive assur-
ances that the Hungarian Government would continue to interpret its emigration law—
considered strict in its letter—liberally. In telegram 4358 from Budapest, December 16,
1977, the Embassy reported that the Hungarian Government proposed changes to the
U.S. draft statement. For initial instructions on MFN provided to Kaiser, see Document
149. Rather than the U.S.-requested promise that cases would be solved in a satisfactory
manner, the Hungarian Government proposed the U.S. language be replaced with:
“Concerning cases of emigration, both parties undertake to act in accordance with the
letter and spirit of the Final Act of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in
Nagy informed Kaiser that, on procedure, “assurances should be made publicly in the
form of a joint communique issued upon the occasion of a meeting at ‘higher level,’”
later clarifying that to mean at the Foreign Minister level. (Ibid.)

Hungary
favor publication. He would send instructions to Ambassador Kaiser
concerning further discussions of this matter.4
5. On the language itself, the Secretary explained his initial reaction
that reference to the Covenant of Civil and Political Rights would be
an appropriate way to deal with the U.S. desire to refer to the UDHR.
The U.S. would consider the Hungarian proposal and send instructions
to Ambassador Kaiser.
6. The Secretary referred to the limited number of outstanding
family reunification cases and expressed the hope for their early resolu-
tion. Puja replied that the GOH is studying these cases which were
only raised recently, and would continue to maintain a liberal policy
in these matters.
7. High level meetings: Puja then repeated a hope expressed by
Prime Minister Lazar that the leaders of the two countries could meet
soon.5 He then extended a formal invitation to the Secretary to pay an
official visit to Budapest.
8. The Secretary accepted Puja’s invitation, with a date to be set at
some time in the future. On higher level meetings, the Secretary said
that he would discuss this question with the President and be back
in touch.
9. Property negotiations: Puja referred to progress and expressed
hope for resolution. The Secretary noted our pleasure at the progress
after reviewing the Puja proposals, it believed “that reference to International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights likely to produce unhelpful controversy in U.S.” The cable
instructed Kaiser to propose to the Hungarian Government that the language in the
assurances statement provide “an obligation to ‘act promptly, constructively, and with
good will’ concerning emigration cases” in the letter and spirit of the Helsinki Final Act.
The telegram also informed Kaiser that the Department had no objections to the Hungar-
ian Government proposal of also including other subjects in the letters. (National
with Prime Minister Lazar. The two discussed bilateral relations, the return of the Crown,
and MFN for Hungary. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780012–
0162) Vance also met with the President of the Hungarian National Assembly, Antal
Apro, on January 6. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs: Staff Material, Europe,
USSR, and East/West, Hunter Subject File, Box 14, Hungary: Crown of St Stephen:
1/78) Discussions on a possible meeting between Vance and Kadar had taken place in
reported that, despite using “oblique” language, the “message was clear: The GOH
would appreciate the Secretary requesting a meeting with Kadar.” (National Archives,
305669 to Budapest, December 23: “We do not repeat not wish to request a meeting
between the Secretary and Kadar. Our strong inclination is to avoid such a meeting if
Embassy reported in telegram 4440 from Budapest, December 23, that the Hungarian
Government understood and that “it is possible the Hungarians will let the matter stand

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
which has taken place and said that a solution to this problem would
be useful in light of our relations.
10. Cultural exchanges: Puja expressed the hope that the cultural
agreement would be “filled.” He said Hungary follows an open door
policy and is ready for exchanges. The Secretary replied that the USG
feels strongly the importance of cultural exchanges and is pleased at
the progress being made.6
11. Puja visit: The Secretary said he hoped Puja would come to the
Special Session on Disarmament and that, if he did, he would come
to Washington to meet with the Secretary.
12. Middle East. Puja requested a briefing on the U.S. view of the
Middle East. The Secretary replied that Sadat’s visit to Israel was a
major breakthrough in that it helped to remove distrust which has
been a principle obstacle to negotiations. The Israeli reaction was real
and spontaneous, and there has been a fundamental change in the
perceptions of both sides. Difficult problems remain and must be solved
by long and hard negotiations. The initial discussions have not dealt
with the most serious problems. The upcoming meetings between
Foreign Ministers and Defense Ministers will be a proper forum to
carry on discussions.
13. The U.S. hopes to make progress through the establishment
of a set of principles designed to create a framework for further
negotiations.
A. Nature of peace: There is a difference of views on this principle,
but it is a subject on which agreement can be reached.
B. Withdrawal from occupied territories: The Secretary did not
discuss this principle other than to mention it.
C. Resolution of the Palestinian question in all respects: This princi-
ple is the most difficult. He referred to the President’s Aswan formula-
tion to which we do not yet have the reaction from all parties. We
have received privately generally positive reactions. Drafting is still
ahead of us, but this new formulation is a start and can serve as a basis.
Jerusalem beginning Jan 15, he would press hard for a resolution of the
above principles. He added that the U.S. believes that a comprehensive
settlement is the only solution. A piecemeal settlement would not last
long. We hope that a general agreement on the above set of principles
U.S. and Hungarian negotiators reached an ad referendum agreement on textual changes
to the “Agreement on Cooperation in Culture, Education, Science and Technology” for
the 1978–1979 period. The agreement was signed by Assistant Secretary Hartman on

Hungary
would be sufficiently broad to allow those nations who presently
abstain from the negotiations to rejoin them. The U.S. does not believe
the forum of the ultimate discussions is a matter of great consequence.
They can take place in Geneva or some other city.
15. Puja said the GOH sees the Arab world as split into two. He
agreed that the Palestinian question is the most difficult one to solve.
Hungary rejects extremist solutions, such as the Iraqi solution. The
right to self-determination is the nucleus of the Palestinian problem.
Hungary is interested in a global settlement because any complication
in the Middle East leads to East-West confrontation.
16. CSCE. Puja noted the large number of proposals on the table
and asked U.S. views on how to proceed. The Secretary replied that
we believe progress has been made and that, through the constructive
review which has taken place an important principle has been estab-
lished. It is now important that we agree on a date for a follow-on
meeting. A final document for the Belgrade meeting should be rather
general in nature, thus taking care of many of the proposals.
17. Nimetz added that we believe Belgrade has been very success-
ful. It is part of a longer term process; in the interim period bilateral
exchanges of views and concrete steps have been and should be taken.
The U.S. would like to conclude the meeting on schedule, mid- or late
February. Specific proposals which cannot be agreed upon should be
left to discussions in other forums. The tone of the final document
should reflect the positive atmosphere of Belgrade, but should not hide
our differences of views. In conclusion Nimetz said the U.S. delegation
would return to Belgrade with instructions to seek a general and posi-
tive final document.
18. Puja said that Hungary wants to end the conference by mid-
February and prefers a short and noble final document. The GOH will
pursue proposals that remain on the table in bilateral channels.
19. MBFR. Puja referred to reports that the FRG is preparing a new
proposal and asked for the Secretary’s views. The Secretary said it is
important to make progress in MBFR, which has languished too long
in a state of uncertainty. There are two current questions: Data exchange
and the relation between Phase I and II. On data exchange, we hope
to solve this question. Resolution would not only create a better atmos-
phere but it is important that both sides have facts about the other.
The allies realize that the relation between the two Phases is a major
concern to the Warsaw Pact. The Allies have not reached any conclusion
about any new initiative, although this is under consideration.
20. Puja said the GOH believes some progress has been made in
MBFR; that the negotiations are worthwhile and that both sides have
made concessions. While there is a strong divergence of views on
percentage reductions, the GOH believes this is the way to proceed.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
While the Socialist countries have stronger conventional forces in the
reduction zone, the fire power and tactical nuclear weapons of the
West must be considered in any reduction. Agreement on any initial
percentage reduction would create confidence and provide a basis for
further steps. At the same time, Hungary, as an observer, does not
play an important role.
21. SALT: The Secretary said the U.S. believes that progress can
be made on MBFR independent of SALT. In SALT, we believe we are
making real progress and that it may be possible to reach agreement
with the Soviets in the not-too-distant future. Puja underlined the
importance of SALT for East-West relations in general and therefore,
Hungary.
22. CBM’s: The Secretary expressed the hope for progress on CBM’s,
noting their importance for the U.S. Congress. In this we feel that
pre-announcement of maneuvers are particularly important, especially
since troops from the USSR can be introduced into Central Europe
quickly. Puja claimed that undetected large troop movements are
not possible.
23. The meeting concluded with Puja reiterating appreciation for
the return of the Crown. He said the road is now open to the solution
of other outstanding problems.
Kaiser
163.
Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance to
President Carter1
Washington, March 22, 1978
SUBJECT
Trade Agreement with Hungary
In Presidential Directive/NSC–212 you directed that, following
return of the Crown of St. Stephen, the United States negotiate a trade
agreement with Hungary provided that Hungary gives adequate emi-
gration assurances. Since the Crown’s return we have obtained these
2 See Document 16.

Hungary
assurances and have negotiated and signed a trade agreement which
meets the requirements of the Trade Act of 1974.3 The Agreement must
be approved by Congress.
The Trade Agreement
The agreement, which provides for reciprocal extension of most-
favored-nation tariff status, will improve the competitive position of
US exports to Hungary. It will also pave the way for the extension of
Exim Bank and CCC credits and for increased sales of US goods. The
agreement contains strong safeguards to protect US markets against
sudden increases of imports from Hungary. STR, Commerce and Treas-
ury participated actively in negotiation of the agreement. Agriculture
and Labor have also approved the text.
Emigration Assurances
The assurances received from Hungary rest on several separate
elements:
—our review of Hungarian emigration and more than a year of
detailed discussions with Hungarian officials about their emigration
law, practice and handling of individual problem cases;
—Hungary’s generally positive record on emigration; and
—a recent exchange of letters in which Hungary has confirmed
the constructive nature of its future emigration policy (Tab 1).4
We have determined that, although Hungary’s emigration law is
formally strict, its emigration practice is the most liberal in the Warsaw
Pact. As a result in Hungary we have few divided family cases. Hunga-
ry’s laws, including that on emigration, do not discriminate against its
Jewish population. See Tab 2 for further information.5
The Hungarians have agreed that the exchange of letters containing
confirmation of their future emigration policy may be made public. I
of negotiations with the Hungarian Government on MFN and the initial meeting between
the two negotiating teams. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
successful and that the agreement would be signed in a matter of days. (Carter Library,
4 Tab 1 is the exchange of letters between Hungarian Foreign Minister Puja and
reported the conclusions of airgrams A–70 and A–71 from Budapest detailing the Embas-
sy’s understanding of Hungarian emigration law, policy, and practice. The Embassy
concluded that the law was strict, but sufficiently flexible to allow the Hungarian Govern-
ment to carry out a liberal emigration policy, that the U.S. Government had developed
an effective method for handling family reunification problems, that prospective emi-
grants did not suffer from discrimination, and that emigration to Israel was not a problem.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
propose that you append these to the documents which you must
submit to Congress for its approval of the agreement.
Congressional and Public Attitudes
Key Congressmen, including Jackson, Ribicoff, Javits, Vanik and
Frenzel, and the Senate Finance and House Ways and Means staffs
have reacted favorably to the agreement and the emigration assurances.
We have encountered no opposition among Hungarian-American orga-
nizations, and the leaders of the American Jewish community have
been positive.
Timing
Representative Vanik has urged that the Administration submit
the agreement to Congress by the end of this month, in order to insure
its consideration during this session.
164.
Editorial Note
On March 27, 1978, Assistant to the President for National Security
Affairs Zbigniew Brzezinski forwarded a memorandum to President
Jimmy Carter recommending that he sign the necessary documents for
waiving the Jackson-Vanik Amendment requirements and submitting
the Hungarian trade agreement to Congress. (Carter Library, National
Security Affairs, Staff Material, Europe, USSR, and East/West, Larrabee
the documents on April 7. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs,
Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 50, Presidential Determinations:
On April 14, the U.S. House of Representatives Trade Subcommit-
tee of the House Ways and Means Committee held hearings on the
Hungarian trade agreement. Telegram 96847 to Budapest, April 15,
informed U.S. Ambassador to Hungary Philip Kaiser that “congres-
sional questioning was wide and ranging, but not contentious” and
generally supportive of the agreement. Administration spokesmen
included Counselor of the Department of State Matthew Nimetz, Kai-
ser, and William Barraclough, Deputy Assistant Secretary of Commerce
for International Trade Policy. (National Archives, RG 59, Central
Foreign Policy File, D780162–0145) The House Ways and Means Com-
mittee approved the agreement on April 27 and sent it to the full House
for a vote. (Telegram 108345 to Budapest, April 27; National Archives,

Hungary
on International Trade of the Senate Finance Committee took up the
matter on May 9 and approved the agreement on June 20. (Telegram
Policy File, D780257–0839) The Senate adopted the measure on June
Central Foreign Policy File, D780267–1010) Following an exchange of
notes between the United States and Hungary, the Agreement of Trade
Relations Between the United States of America and the Hungarian
165.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, May 30, 1979
SUBJECT
Extension of Jackson-Vanik Waivers
Cy Vance has forwarded a package recommending that you (1)
extend your general waiver authority; and (2) continue the waivers
for Hungary and Romania for another 12 months. (Tab C) Treasury,
Commerce, STR, and Agriculture concur.2 (C)
This is a routine action. However, failure to renew your waiver
authority would mean that the United States would no longer be able
to extend MFN on a reciprocal basis to any East European country or
to the Soviet Union or China. Failure to continue the Hungarian and
Romanian waivers would severely damage our relations with these
two countries and undermine the policy set forth in PD–21 regarding
Eastern European countries. (C)
Under the Trade Act Presidential action on both these issues is
required by June 3. (C)
RECOMMENDATIONS:
1. That you sign the transmittal message to the Congress at
Tab A which forwards your recommendation on the general waiver
through C are attached but not printed.
2 The “Recommendation for Extension of Waiver Authority” is printed in Public

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
authority and the continuation of the waivers for Romania and
Hungary.3 (C)
2. That you sign the Presidential Determination at Tab B that the
further extension of the waiver authority granted by subsection 402(c)
of the Trade Act will substantially promote the Jackson-Vanik objective
of free emigration.4 (C)
OMB concurs.
Carter, 1979, Book I, p. 979.
166.
Memorandum of Conversation1
SUBJECT
Summary of Dr. Brzezinski’s Meeting with Hungarian Deputy Prime Minister
Istvan Huszar (U)
PARTICIPANTS
H.E. Istvan Huszar, Deputy Prime Minister, Hungarian People’s Republic
H.E. Janos Nagy, Deputy Foreign Minister, Hungarian People’s Republic
H.E. Ferenc Esztergalyos, Ambassador to the United States
Mr. Gyorgy Banlaki, Interpreter
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski
Mr. Stephen Larrabee, Notetaker
Dr. Brzezinski opened the meeting by welcoming DPM Huszar to
the United States.2 He said that he had spoken earlier to the President
The meeting took place in Brzezinski’s office.
2 On July 9, Larrabee informed Brzezinski that Huszar was traveling to the United
States at the invitation of Secretary of Commerce Kreps. Kreps requested that the Presi-
dent briefly meet with Huszar. Larrabee recommended that, in light of the President’s
busy schedule, Brzezinski meet with the Hungarian official instead, with a Presidential
“drop-by,” if his schedule permits. Brzezinski disapproved both recommendations. (Ibid.)
However, on July 16, Tarnoff forwarded a Department of State briefing paper for Brzezin-
ski’s meeting with Huszar. In his memorandum to Brzezinski forwarding the paper,
Larrabee stated that Vance was sick and could not meet with Huszar as scheduled. (Ibid.)

Hungary
(who was making a speech in Kansas on energy). The President had
specifically told Dr. Brzezinski to tell DPM Huszar how happy he was
to have a Hungarian statesman visiting the White House. (U)
DPM Huszar thanked Dr. Brzezinski. He informed him that on
Friday he had met with First Secretary Kadar to discuss his upcoming
trip to the United States. During the meeting Kadar had asked him to
convey his best regards to President Carter. Huszar then added that
he fully understood the busy schedule which the President had and
asked that Dr. Brzezinski convey to him his best regards. (U)
Dr. Brzezinski stressed the importance that the United States
attached to relations with Hungary, both symbolically and substan-
tively. The US felt that relations had been developing well. The return
of the Crown had been important symbolically in contributing to the
improvement of relations. (U)
DPM Huszar agreed. He felt that relations were developing well.
The return of the Crown and the Coronation Jewels had had an impor-
tant impact on relations. He understood that Dr. Brzezinski had also
played an important role in the decision and he wished to thank him
for his contribution. (U)
Dr. Brzezinski said that he was pleased to have played a role and
noted that perhaps his ethnic background had been helpful. (U)
DPM Huszar then gave Dr. Brzezinski a gift of a coin commemorat-
ing the return of the Crown. (U)
Dr. Brzezinski stated that he had been to Hungary several times.
He had been impressed with the Hungarians’ sense of history and the
importance that they attached to history. He had been particularly
pleased to see a monument to General Bem. (U)
DPM Huszar noted that Bem was a common national hero. The
Hungarian people referred to him as Father Bem. He then turned to
political relations, noting that he could not say very much new, but
that this was good. (U)
Dr. Brzezinski interjected that it was often more important who
said it, not whether it was old or new. (U)
DPM Huszar commented that political relations were improving
and that meetings between officials of the two countries were becoming
more frequent. He was glad that Representatives and Senators were
visiting Hungary in increasing numbers. In this connection he noted
that he was the third Hungarian Prime Minister to visit the United
States. Continuing, he stressed that he wanted to say that the Hungarian
Government was officially prepared to raise the level of political
relations. He had come to the United States with this specific task.
Beyond this, however, he had no specific agenda; there were no agree-
ments to be signed. He was glad to have the opportunity for an

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
exchange of views on ways to remove obstacles to improve relations.
The United States and Hungary should have relations appropriate and
worthy of the two countries. (C)
Turning to the economic area, Huszar stressed that US and Hungar-
ian firms should be encouraged to deal with each other. He hoped that
the visit would lead to concrete gains in this regard. He was happy
that he had had an opportunity to meet people in the government at
the political level as well as the financial and monetary circles. In
general, there had been no change since the visit of US officials. Noting
that the Hungarian Government was crossing its fingers that SALT
would be ratified, he said that Hungary hoped that the ratification
would have a beneficial impact on the MBFR discussions in Vienna. (C)
Huszar then returned to the subject of bilateral relations. It was a
source of great satisfaction to the Hungarian Government that a lot
had transpired in relations between the two countries. The trade agree-
ment had brought its first results. Hungarian exports had grown by
two thirds over the last year. Imports had increased, but to a lesser
extent. Talks at the recent Joint Economic Commission meeting had
been useful and constructive. Noting that interest in American firms
and markets on the part of Hungarians had increased, he said that
the Hungarian Government hoped to see the active involvement of
American firms and companies; however, the US occupied only eighth
place in Hungarian trade with capitalist countries. (C)
In response, Dr. Brzezinski said that he would like to make three
points. First, the United States was also prepared to move further on
the political level. There were always practical scheduling problems,
but he wanted to register the basic point that we were ready to move
forward. He suggested that the appropriate authorities in both coun-
tries stay in touch in order to find the right moment for announcing
this publically. (C)
Noting that bilateral relations were moving well, Dr. Brzezinski
said he would like to make two additional points on wider issues. The
first was in regard to SALT. The United States attached considerable
importance to SALT and the impact that this could have on US-Soviet
relations and detente. If the Senate were to refuse to ratify SALT it
would be a setback for detente. The Senate would not ratify the agree-
ment unless it was sure that it could be verified. In order to verify the
agreement, the United States had to engage in verification activities
and overflights over Turkey. Whether or not to permit such activities
over Turkey was a decision for the Turkish government alone. How-
ever, the Turks would not give this permission if the Soviet Union
regarded it as an unfriendly act. Therefore, positive Soviet acquiescence
was needed. This was not the same as Soviet permission, Dr. Brzezinski
emphasized, because it was not the Soviet right. The question was one

Hungary
of acquiescence. The Soviets did not seem quite to understand this.
They seemed to equate the verification activities with more traditional
forms of intelligence gathering. The United States felt there was a
fundamental distinction and that a more sophisticated Soviet attitude
on this question would be an important contribution to detente. Pre-
cisely because Hungary had a fundamental interest in US-Soviet
detente, the Hungarians had an interest in this question and could
make a contribution to detente if they could influence the Soviets in a
positive direction on this question. (S)
Dr. Brzezinski stated that his last point was motivated by his desire
to widen and make more firm US-Soviet detente. Contrary to his reputa-
tion, he strongly believed that unless US-Soviet detente was broadly
based and genuinely reciprocal, the American people would eventually
reject it. He then turned to the question of instability in the Third
World. To the end of this century, many parts of the world were going
to be in turmoil. This was not our doing, nor was it the Soviet’s doing.
This was a result of internal dynamics in many of the countries
involved. However, he wished to emphasize that if this turbulence was
exploited by one side or the other, it could undermine detente. The
US was particularly concerned by the Soviet use of Cubans as proxies
in certain areas of the Third World. This use of the Cuban military was
bound to have an impact on American attitudes, and in fact the impact
was already beginning to be felt. It was always more difficult to start
something like that than to terminate it. We did not expect the Soviet
Union to turn it off like a faucet, but we would hope that the Soviets
would be sensitive to our concerns, whether in Africa or Latin America.
We had been sensitive to Soviet concerns so far. But the Soviet side
had to understand the need for restraint. This was why in Vienna that
we told the Soviets that it was not our purpose to use our relations
with China against the Soviet Union. We understood Soviet concerns
and we realized any attempt to use China against the Soviet Union
would create problems for detente. However, if present trends contin-
ued, there would be a strong reaction in the United States. The Presiden-
tial elections had a way of surfacing these visceral attitudes. He men-
tioned this, he said, because we recognized the larger interest which
Hungary had in East-West cooperation and coordination. (S)
Dr. Brzezinski concluded the meeting by taking DPM Huszar on
a tour of the Oval Office. (U)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
167.
Telegram From the Embassy in Hungary to the Department
of State1
214. Subject: US Goals, Objectives and Resource Management
(GORM) for FY 1982: Ambassador’s Policy Statement. Ref: A. CERP
1. (C)-entire text.
2. Present state of relations: At the beginning of 1980, U.S. policy
toward Eastern Europe is undergoing its stiffest test since the issuance
of what our policy would be in light of the response of Eastern Europe
to the Iranian and Afghan crises and the convincing display of the
power of the Soviet Union these two crises provoked to impose disci-
pline on the Governments of Eastern Europe on issues of crucial impor-
tance to the Soviets. I endorse the Department’s preliminary position
as outlined in State 9408.4
3. The differentiated policy called for in PD–21 will be particularly
difficult to maintain at a time of East-West tension and polarization. I
do not expect the Hungarian regime to adopt positions distinctive from
those of the Soviet Union on Iran and particularly on Afghanistan. The
Hungarians are well aware of the high price the subservience of their
foreign policy to Soviet goals and propaganda will exact, if not in terms
of specific issues in our relations, then in the overall deterioration in
the East-West climate, to which Hungary is particularly vulnerable.
The delay in ratification of SALT II makes the immediate outlook for
East-West relations even more bleak.
4. Up to the time of these crises, we achieved step-by-step progress
in our bilateral relations with Hungary. We have:
Confidential. Sent for information to Belgrade, East Berlin, Bucharest, Moscow, Prague,
Sofia, Warsaw, and USNATO.
updated the reporting requirements for the Embassies’ annual review sent to Washington,
effective beginning fiscal year 1982. The Department reported that annual reports were
no longer required unless certain conditions warranted such a report. Among those
conditions: “the Ambassador or Bureau believes [a report] necessary, including a change
in circumstances affecting relations with that country.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central
Foreign Policy File, [no film number])
3 See Document 16.
initial guidance on United States policy toward Eastern Europe in the wake of the Soviet
invasion of Afghanistan. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800021–

Hungary
—Successfully concluded the program document to the cultural
and scientific exchange agreement5 and secured a satisfactory site for
our first major independent cultural exhibit in Hungary.
—Deepened our economic cooperation through an EXIM/National
Bank Agreement, a Double Taxation Agreement,6 a successful first
meeting of our Joint Economic and Commercial Committee, and imple-
mentation of a bilateral MTN agreement.7
—Continued to urge the GOH to resolve outstanding family reuni-
fication problem cases, which have been kept to a minimum.
—Made progress toward a property settlement; and
—Maintained a high level political dialogue through successful
visits: Codels O’Neill, Brademan, and Vanik and Assistant Secretary
Vest to Hungary and Deputy Prime Minister Huszar to the United
States.8 Further substantial (although unspectacular) progress on such
projects as the provision of Consular services to increasing numbers
of Americans and Hungarians, markedly increased distribution of ICA
materials, and the opening of offices in Budapest by Dow Chemical
and an American bank underlined our growing practical interaction
with Hungary and consequent decrease in Hungary’s dependence on
the Soviet Union.
5. We still have problems: Some family reunification cases persist
in spite of our general success in this area; a serious dispute over patent
rights or the violation of them; slow development of our share of the
Hungarian market following the extension of MFN; too slow progress
in our property negotiations; discouragingly limited contact with Party
officials; and above all at this time, unacceptable criticism in the Hun-
garian media of the U.S. and our policies reflecting a comprehensive
identification with Soviet policies.
6. The Hungarian regime, for its own reasons, continued to follow
policies which will redound to our long-term benefit; an international
5 The “Agreement between the Government of the United States of American and the
Government of the Hungarian People’s Republic on Cooperation in Culture, Education,
6 The United States and Hungary signed an exchange of notes on the “Avoidance
of Double Taxation and the Prevention of Fiscal Evasion with Respect to Taxes on
Income” in Washington on February 12. The Senate approved the agreement on July 9
and President Carter signed the instrument of ratification on August 7. (Carter Library,
Hungarian Tariff Agreement went into effect January 1, 1980. (National Archives, RG
8 See Document 166 for a memorandum of conversation between Huszar and
Brzezinski.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
approach to economic problems, including economic reform; toleration
of limited internal dissidence and criticism; and reasonably settled
church/state relations which permit, inter alia, increased interaction
with American religious institutions.
7. The next two years: It is not possible at this time to predict how
long the deterioration in East-West relations will last, but this trend
will undoubtedly dominate our relations with Hungary for the first
part of this period. We should expect our ability to make progress
in bilateral relations with Hungary will be affected even though the
Hungarians have already told us that they hope the present interna-
tional scene will not hurt our bilateral relations.
8. We should take into account other specific developments which
may also have some influence on our policies:
A. Party Congress: The Hungarian Party Congress will be held in
March.9 The outlook is that the leading political personality in Hungary,
Janos Kadar, will remain in power and that his policies, most notably
economic reform and relatively relaxed domestic policies, will be reaf-
firmed and continued. The main themes of Hungary’s foreign policies,
including its loyal support of the USSR, will also be reaffirmed. If the
examination of Hungarian policy which will take place at the Congress
results in any major changes leading away from internal liberalization
or produces such changes in the Hungarian relationship with the Soviet
Union as an increased military role for Hungary within the Warsaw
Pact, our policies will need reassessment. In this regard, we should
examine the Hungarian posture in case instability develops in Eastern
Europe as a result of some crucial development such as Tito’s death.
B. Economics: Hungary is attempting both economic reform and
stabilization at the same time. Reform opens up possibilities which we
should be alert to pursue to increase Hungary’s integration into the
West and encourage its development of a decentralized and market
oriented economy. Trade and possible membership in the IMF are
obvious areas of possible cooperation. Stabilization means that the
Hungarian regime will be less capable of responding to the needs of
the Hungarian people for a better standard of living. Both elements
introduce elements of potential political instability into a overall stable
situation. For the foreseeable future, Hungary will be following a policy
of relative economic austerity, which will hamper our efforts to increase
our exports and may undercut to some extent the political acceptance
by the Hungarian people of the present regime.
C. CSCE: The Madrid Conference is scheduled for November. On
balance, I believe we should continue to plan to consult with the Hun-
9 See Document 168.

Hungary
garians to explore areas of cooperation which are in the U.S. national
interest. At the same time, we should clear up a few lingering aspects
of our relations which date from the past: remove personnel ceilings
on our respective Embassies and agree on the issuance of multiple-
entry visas for businessmen. We welcome the Hesburgh Commission’s
mandate to examine the INA and hope that the present section 212 (a)
28 will be rewritten to permit more flexibility, thereby reducing both
a political irritant as well as our Consular work load.
D. Complexion of relations: With the signing of the Trade Agree-
ment in 1978 and implementation of the steps which flowed from this
development (EXIM facilities, for example) the emphasis on economic
relations has shifted to practical hard work directed toward increased
trade and economic cooperation. Implementation rather than striking
new advances is what we should expect. On the other hand, we should
be able to look forward to cooperation in the cultural field to an extent
unprecedented since the end of the war now that we have established
the framework. The new result of these two developments is that the
emphasis in our current work may shift from economic to cultural.
9. Political work will continue to be difficult. A dialogue through
high level visits remains our best tool here. In this connection, the
desire of Kadar to visit the U.S. must be addressed after the elections
of November 1980. This may be the dominant issue in our relations
in 1981.
10. Our highest administrative priority will be a property settle-
ment. For the first time in several years an administrative issue may
well be at the forefront of our relations.
11. Hungary in a regional and global context: Global issues—Iran,
Afghanistan, SALT II—are bound to have an adverse effect on our
relations with Hungary and may eventually dominate them if the
present downward trend in the East-West climate continues. I expect
Hungary to remain in the middle of the Eastern European pack. They
will try hard to preserve the progress they have made with the U.S.
in the economic field, because it is in their long term interest as well
as ours. At the same time they will continue to identify closely with the
Soviet Union, with some nuances which are not really that important
to us, but of some significance to the more “progressive” elements in
the society. The Hungarians would not want to risk a sharp Soviet
reaction which would sweep away completely the relative economic
independence they have worked so hard to achieve.
12. Resources: The nature of our relationship with Hungary has
changed substantially over the past two years, but the resources of the
Embassy have not kept up with this change, especially in personnel.
We have greatly expanded our ICA work and have prospects of an
even greater expansion in cultural exchanges. We need an additional

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
person in the field. Both our political and economic work have increased
to the point where with existing staff we can handle little more than
day-to-day operational work. We do not have the resources to report
in depth on significant developments affecting Hungarian internal eco-
nomic and political policies, as well as our bilateral relations. We are
forced practically to ignore analysis of the highly significant labor and
religious
scenes.
We
need
an
additional
political
officer
and
an additional economic officer if we are to more than scratch the
surface in our analysis of Hungarian political, social and economic
developments.
Kaiser
168.
Intelligence Assessment Prepared in the Central Intelligence
Agency1
Washington, March 1980
Hungary on the Eve of the 12th Party
Congress [classification not declassified]
Key Judgments
At the 12th Congress of the Hungarian Socialist Workers Party,
scheduled to begin on 24 March, First Secretary Janos Kadar will seek
endorsement of current policies rather than undertake new ones.
As Hungary enters the 1980s, Kadar must draw heavily upon the
reserves of popular trust he has established during 23 years of rule.
Public confidence in Kadar’s leadership, probably unparalleled in other
Warsaw Pact countries, rests upon his responsiveness to the demands
of Hungarian consumers and to his use of compromise and moderation
rather than repression to maintain political control. Compromise and
moderation have been particularly evident in Kadar’s handling of intel-
lectuals and, in recent years, in his relations with the Catholic Church.
Major challenges confront Kadar in the area of economic policy.
To improve Hungary’s hard currency balance of payments, the regime
Party Congress. Secret; [handling restriction not declassified]. The assessment was prepared
in the Office of Economic Research and coordinated with the Office of Central Reference
and the National Intelligence Officer for the USSR and Eastern Europe.

Hungary
will continue to curtail economic growth and allow the standard of
living to stagnate. It will also continue to implement an economic
reform plan that entails relaxation of central controls and greater reli-
ance on market forces. Prices, which are flexible and in many cases
market determined, are to be generally responsive to world price
changes. Enterprises have received greater freedom to determine wages
and discharge workers; they will retain a substantial portion of their
profits but will no longer be immune from bankruptcy.
In the conduct of foreign policy, Kadar has managed to secure
from Moscow a degree of latitude that surpasses that of any other
Warsaw Pact state except Romania. He has done this by adhering
closely to the Soviet line on issues the USSR considers most important
while cultivating better relations with the West, particularly in the
commercial sphere. Kadar appears to retain the confidence of Soviet
leader Brezhnev, who said in Budapest last May that recognition of
the “specific features” of each country had become the “norm” in
Soviet-Hungarian relations.
Notable benefits have come from improved relations with the
United States. The Kadar regime gained politically from the US deci-
sions to return the Crown of St. Stephen—the symbol of Hungarian
nationhood—and to grant Hungary most-favored-nation trading
status.
The months ahead will test Kadar’s ability to maintain both his
domestic and foreign policies. Complex economic problems will con-
front those charged with implementing reform; public apprehension
and resentment over stringent economic measures will tax the ability of
the regime to maintain popular confidence; if the international situation
continues to deteriorate, Kadar may find it increasingly difficult to
accommodate Soviet sensitivities while maintaining positive relations
with the West.
[1 line not declassified]
[Omitted here is the body of the assessment.]

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
169.
Memorandum From Timothy Deal of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, March 19, 1980
SUBJECT
SCC on March 20: Hungarian Grain
The SCC asked for an assessment of reports that Hungary is selling
grain to the USSR and might replace it with US grain. We have con-
firmed that the Soviets have asked Hungary for 800,000 tons of wheat.
The Hungarians told us they will meet this request from domestic
supplies. (C)
After the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, we informed East Europe
Governments that diversion of US grain or controlled technology to
the USSR would adversely affect bilateral relations and jeopardize
additional purchases from the US. In the case of Hungary, we also said
we would take into account any significant change in the pattern of
Hungarian grain imports from the US and Hungarian exports to the
USSR which might indicate surrogate purchases for the USSR. (C)
State has prepared an options paper (attached)2 for SCC considera-
tion. The Implementation Group reviewed it at today’s meeting. The
paper sets forth three options: (1) continue present policy; (2) request
East European countries not to sell grain to the USSR from domestic
supplies above traditional export levels and avoid diversion of US
grain; (3) seek commitments from NATO allies and other Western grain
exporters on the establishment of quantitative limits on grain exports
to each Eastern European country. (C)
After extended debate, agencies recommended that the SCC
approve Option 1, as amended in the discussion. State will present this
position in the meeting. Under option 1, we would: (a) continue to
urge Eastern European countries to avoid diversion of US grain to the
USSR or use grain to replace exports to the USSR; (b) not object to
sales of grain to the USSR from domestic supplies; (c) monitor carefully
Hungarian and Eastern European grain trade with the US and other
cooperating countries; and (d) urge West European governments not
indicates that Brzezinski saw the memorandum.
2 The undated paper, entitled “East European Grain Sales to the Soviet Union,” is
attached but not printed.

Hungary
to make extraordinary shipments of grain to Hungary and other East
European countries. (C)
I recommend you support Option one for the following reasons:
—We have no evidence that Hungary or other Eastern European
countries are diverting grain to the USSR although there are still numer-
ous possibilities for swaps or transshipments.
—It would be exceptionally difficult to define “traditional” or “nor-
mal” Hungarian or East European trade with the USSR. For example,
in the past five years, Hungarian grain exports to the USSR have ranged
from 137 to 854 thousand tons.
—Option 2 would require a greater degree of cooperation from
Hungary than we would expect from our allies and third world
countries.
—Western grain exporters will not agree to quantitative limits on
exports to East Europe as proposed in Option 3.
—We have a strong a political stake in treating East Europe differ-
ently from the USSR so long as these countries limit their involvement
in Afghanistan or in other future Soviet ventures. (C)
Whatever option the SCC chooses, State should reemphasize to
the Hungarian government that we consider this a critical issue and
that efforts by Hungary or other East European countries to circumvent
our controls will have a serious, long-term impact on overall
relations.3 (C)
3 On March 21, Brzezinski informed the Secretaries of State, Defense, Agriculture,
the Treasury, Commerce, and the Director of Central Intelligence that the President had
“approved the recommendation of the SCC as follows: We should deal with the Hungar-
ian case on its own merits, without attempting to expand it into a universal set of
guidelines. We should inform the Hungarians that we consider sales of 800,000 tons to
the USSR this year to be excessive by about 200,000 tons and inform them that sales in
that amount—as well as diversion of high technology items—would be seen by the U.S.
as unfavorable and would be taken into account in our future sales of grain and other
items to Hungary.” (Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
170.
Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the
Department of State (Tarnoff) to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, March 29, 1980
SUBJECT
Hungarian Wheat Sales to the USSR
The Department of State has implemented the approved recom-
mendation of the SCC meeting of March 20, 1980, by calling in Hungar-
ian Ambassador Esztergalyos on March 28 and informing him as
follows:2
—We attach importance to the limitations we have placed on sales
of both grain and high technology to the USSR. We have explained to
your government and to many others that diversion of such items to
the USSR would be viewed most unfavorably by us.
—On high technology exports, we have purposely continued sales
to Eastern European countries because we have wanted to recognize
their special needs and their noninvolvement in the invasion of
Afghanistan.
—On grain, we understand that the Soviet Union has asked to buy
an abnormally large amount of grain from Hungary this year, up to
several hundred thousand tons above the shipments in the most recent
years. We believe shipments of this magnitude would be somewhat
excessive. They would be viewed unfavorably by the US and taken
into account in our own future sales of grain to Hungary because such
Hungarian shipments would undercut our policy of reducing the total
of our grain shipments to the Soviet Union.
In addition, we have instructed our embassies in Canberra and
Ottawa and our mission in Brussels to inform host governments and
the Commission of our approach to the Hungarians on grain exports
to Aaron on April 2, informing Brzezinski that the Department had not included hard
numbers in the discussion with the Hungarians to protect the Hungarian source who
had provided the information to the USDA. (Ibid.)
of the discussion between Barry and the Hungarian Ambassador the day before. The
points outlined in the March 29 memorandum to Brzezinski were delivered to Ambassa-
dor Esztergalyos as a non-paper. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
Hungarians “definitely have the message and understand our position” but that “from
our viewpoint, we believe that we should not continue to hit the Hungarians on wheat
diversion until we have more evidence that we should be concerned.” (National Archives,

Hungary
as soon as we have advised them that the demarche has been made
in Washington.
Peter Tarnoff
171.
Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the
Department of State (Tarnoff) to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, May 27, 1980
SUBJECT
Briefing Paper for Mr. Aaron’s Meeting with Hungarian Deputy Foreign
I. PARTICIPANTS
Americans
Hungarians
Mr. Aaron
Janos NAGY, Deputy Foreign
Minister
(Phonetic: NODGE)
Ambassador Janos PETRAN,
Chief MFA Department V
Ferenc ESZTERGALYOS,
Hungarian Ambassador to the
U.S.
(Phonetic: Ess-ter-GUY-oash)
II. INTRODUCTION
Nagy is responsible for Hungary’s relations with the West. He will
be named very shortly to be State Secretary, the number two position in
the Foreign Ministry. Petran is Hungary’s chief CSCE and disarmament
negotiator, and has just been named to head MFA Territorial Depart-
ment V, which conducts Hungary’s relations with the U.S., Canada, the
found. Stephen Larrabee, of the NSC, forwarded the briefing paper to David Aaron
under a May 28 covering memorandum outlining the main points. (Ibid.) Attached
biographic material is not printed.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
U.K., the FRG and Benelux. Nagy and Petran are heading a Hungarian
delegation to the U.S. for annual consultations on CSCE.2
Hungary continues to stand out among Warsaw Pact countries
in terms of its relatively relaxed domestic situation, commitment to
economic reforms, and forthcoming attitude toward CSCE implementa-
tion. In the post-Afghanistan period Hungary has continued to stress
detente and CSCE. The Hungarians welcome our policy of continuing
to seek further improvements in U.S.-Hungarian relations.
III. ISSUES
A. Afghanistan and East-West Relations
—U.S. opposition to the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan arises from
a sincere desire to further the cause of international peace and stability.
The Soviets’ use of force against a small country threatens the security
of all nations and raises serious questions about their future intentions.
—The actions we have taken against the Soviets, therefore, are
not intended to affect Eastern Europe. We continue to sell grain and
controlled technology to Hungary. While our export licensing controls
have been extended, we will continue to grant exceptions to specific
restrictions for exports to Hungary and other Eastern European
countries.
—However, as we have pointed out to Hungarian officials on
a number of occasions, continued access to U.S. grain and sensitive
technology will depend on Hungary’s willingness to respect our con-
cerns regarding their end use.
B. Iran
—Although we appreciate Hungary’s private statements strongly
disapproving of Iran’s holding of diplomatic hostages, we are disap-
pointed by Hungary’s public statements which tend to emphasize Iran’s
alleged grievances against the United States and imply that the hostages
are strictly a bilateral issue.
—We are actively pursuing all opportunities for discussion with
Iran that could lead to an honorable resolution of the crisis. We are
convinced that economic sanctions supported by nations committed
2 Nagy also met with Counselor Ridgway and Under Secretary Nimetz. In telegram
142884 to Budapest, May 31, the Department informed the Embassy of Ridgway’s discus-
sions with Nagy, which focused on East-West relations, high-level visits, trade, economic,
and cultural relations. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800266–
0800) The Department transmitted the memorandum of conversation between Nimetz
and Nagy on June 3, to Budapest in telegram 145697. The conversation focused on East-
West relations, bilateral relations, Yugoslavia, and CSCE. (National Archives, RG 59,
Central Foreign Policy File, D800272–0403)

Hungary
to the peaceful resolution of disputes will have a constructive impact,
contributing to the resolution of the crisis.
—We believe that Hungary shares an interest in the release of the
hostages, which would contribute to the easing of tensions and would
create a safer environment for diplomats of all nations. Active steps
by Hungary to secure the hostages’ release would be deeply appreci-
ated by our government and people.
C. Bilateral Relations
—We are pleased with the great progress we have made in our
bilateral relations over the past three years. It is no exaggeration to say
that the President’s decision to return the Crown of St. Stephen to the
Hungarian people and the signing of the Trade Agreement in July 1978
marked the beginning of a new era in U.S.-Hungarian relations.
—We remain committed to improving relations with Hungary on
the basis of mutual respect and advantage.3
•It reflects our mutual desire to expand economic and commer-
cial relations.
•It reflects our mutual desire to implement the provisions of all
three baskets of the Helsinki Final Act.
Peter Tarnoff
3 For an attached political overview of Hungary, see Document 172.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
172.
Paper Prepared in the Department of State1
Washington, May 1980
Hungary—Political Overview
Foreign Affairs
Hungary is allied with the USSR and consistently backs Soviet
positions on major international issues. However, on matters of lesser
significance to the Soviet Union and of direct importance to Hungary,
Hungarian foreign policy displays independent and sovereign aspects.
One such area arises out of Hungary’s heavy dependence on foreign
trade and its desire for Western technology. Accordingly, since 1977
Party First Secretary Kadar has made official visits to Austria, West
Germany, Italy and France, and Hungary has developed an extensive
set of primarily economically-oriented relations with Western coun-
tries, including the U.S. Western countries, in turn, utilize Hungary’s
forthcoming attitude toward the Helsinki Final Act to engage in con-
structive dialogues with Hungary on all three Baskets of CSCE, includ-
ing its humanitarian and cultural provisions. (U)
Hungary has followed what it calls a “principled” policy in regard
to Iran. This couples expressions of understanding for Iran’s grievances
against the United States with low-key denunciation of the holding of
diplomatic hostages as a violation of international law. After initial
hesitation, Hungary has followed the Soviet line on Afghanistan, with
emphasis on the arguments that the Soviet intervention was “lawful”
under agreements between the USSR and Afghanistan and that the
latter had the right to request “self-defense” aid from its neighbor. (U)
U.S.-Hungarian relations have improved dramatically in the past
several years. The two most important elements in this improvement
were the return of the Crown of Saint Stephen to the Hungarian people
on January 6, 1978, by a Presidential delegation headed by Secretary
Vance, and the entry into force on July 7, 1978, of a trade agreement
establishing MFN tariff treatment for the exports of both countries. The
trade agreement negotiations entailed discussions and understandings
with Hungary on questions of emigration in compliance with the Jack-
son-Vanik provisions of the Trade Act of 1974. (U)
Although there have been no major outstanding political issues
between the U.S. and Hungary since conclusion of the Trade Agreement
in 1978, deteriorating U.S.–Soviet relations have made more difficult
Hungary
the task of maintaining and building on the recent progress in U.S.–
Hungarian relations. Although both sides have signaled a desire to
maintain positive aspects of the bilateral relationship, Hungary has
quietly exhibited some nervousness about being placed in an embar-
rassing position relative to the Soviet Union by being ostensibly favored
by the U.S. in the framework of our differentiated policy toward Eastern
Europe. Hungary also is concerned about the degree to which U.S.
export-control measures directed against the Soviet Union may im-
pinge on it. We, in turn, have concerns about the potential diversion
of U.S. grain or technology to the USSR. (C)
Domestic Affairs
The Communist Party leadership retains control over political life.
However, through its “alliances” policy the Party encourages participa-
tion of Communists and non-Communists alike in building “socialist”
Hungary under the maxim, “who is not against us is with us.” (U)
Party First Secretary Janos Kadar has gained a large degree of
acceptance among the political elite and the public, and Hungarians
credit the government with having achieved substantial improvements
in living standards, a relaxed cultural atmosphere, and political and
economic stability over the years since 1956. (U)
In 1968 Hungary introduced an economic reform called the New
Economic Mechanism (NEM) which is in large part responsible for
Hungary’s relative domestic prosperity. The NEM provides for a large
degree of enterprise and managerial autonomy in making production
and pricing decisions. In mid-1979 Hungary began to implement a
series of measures to revitalize this mechanism to make the economy
more efficient and internationally competitive. The new measures have
already entailed major consumer price increases which, coupled with
energy conservation stringencies, portend a pause in the increase in
living standards. (U)
Although the Hungarian Government does not encourage religion,
it tolerates it. It is at peace with Protestants and Jews, and has reached a
modusvivendiwiththeVaticanandwiththeCatholicChurchinHungary.
Laszlo Cardinal Lekai was recognized in 1976 as head of the Catholic
Church in Hungary, the first primate since Cardinal Mindszenty. (U)
Hungary permits a significant degree of freedom of travel for its
citizens to Western countries. Some 355,000 Hungarians (out of a popu-
lation of 10.6 million) currently visit the West annually. Hungary’s
record on permitting emigration is modestly positive. (U)
The Twelfth Congress of the Hungarian Socialist Workers Party in
late March endorsed Hungary’s unique (in communist terms) economic
reform measures while reiterating Hungary’s allegiance to its alliance
with the USSR and support for Soviet foreign policy positions. Billed as

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
a “working Congress,” this quinquennial meeting addressed primarily
domestic concerns. In a thematic context which both emphasized and
called for more trust between Party and people, the Congress in effect
ratified the Kadarist domestic course, including new economic reform
measures. (C)
173.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
Hungary1
237207. Madrid for Zimmerman, CSCE Del. Subject: Hungarian
Ambassador’s Meeting With the Counselor.
1. (C)-entire text
2. Summary: Meeting with Counselor Ridgway following home
leave consultations in Budapest, Hungarian Ambassador Esztergalyos
confirmed Hungary’s intent to maintain and extend positive bilateral
relations. Esztergalyos expressed concern about the President’s refer-
ence to Hungary’s human rights practices in his nomination acceptance
speech,2 and exchanged views with the Counselor at some length on
CSCE-Madrid topics. The Counselor praised careful management by
both sides of the bilateral relationship and took note of Esztergalyos’
remarks about the President’s comment. The conversation touched also
on economic and business topics. End summary.
3. Bilateral relations. Esztergalyos said his home leave consultations
confirmed that in Hungary’s view, nothing has changed for the worse
in bilateral relations and Hungary’s aims and goals remain as before.
He had been gratified to see his colleagues in Budapest on the same
wavelength as himself concerning the positive nature of the relation-
ship. Ridgway responded that a well-managed, realistic approach by
both sides had yielded positive results. Neither side has exaggerated
Confidential; Priority. Sent for information to Madrid. Drafted by Longo; cleared by
Bridges and Barry; approved by Ridgway.
2 Referring to human rights in his August 14 speech accepting the nomination of
the Democratic Party, Carter said, “ask the former political prisoners who now live in
freedom if we should abandon our stand on human rights. Ask the dissidents in the
Soviet Union about our commitment to human rights. Ask the Hungarian Americans,
ask the Polish Americans, listen to Pope John Paul II.” He continued: “As long as I am
President, we will hold high the banner of human rights, and you can depend on it.”

Hungary
expectations, and a careful, case-by-case approach to issues was and
is useful. Regarding larger international issues, use of measured lan-
guage to describe differences is helpful and is noted. Ridgway noted
that she retains the same favorable impression of U.S.-Hungarian
relations as during her visit to Budapest last June,3 and that she had
been particularly favorably impressed by the quality and content of
her talks with Janos Nagy and other Hungarian officials in Washington
last May and in Budapest.
4. Ridgway continued that we should keep it this way regarding
items on the bilateral agenda. Esztergalyos responded that the U.S.
and Hungary have molded a good businesslike relationship in which
candor is also important. Each side realizes that problems should not
be left for time to heal since, instead, they can grow worse. Ridgway
acknowledged that smaller problems, left unresolved, can grow into
bigger ones. She noted favorably both governments’ conscientious han-
dling of the chemical patents disputes, and recent resolution of the
old question of Embassy personnel ceilings. She expressed hope that
another old question of USG properties in Budapest would be taken
care of, and said she thought we have now found a way constructively
to discuss that issue. Esztergaylos replied he thinks a solution can
be found.
4. The President’s statement. Esztergalyos said he had been sur-
prised to see President Carter’s reference to human rights in Hungary
during his nomination acceptance speech (“...ask the Hungarian-Amer-
icans.”). He volunteered that he had not called Budapest’s attention to
the comment lest it precipitate a sharp reaction there. Likening the
comment to “thunder from a blue sky,” Esztergalyos said it could raise
questions in certain circles both in Hungary and the U.S. that Hungary
has bowed to pressure from the United States in its human rights
practices. Esztergalyos denied that this had been the case. He said he
personally could accept the remark as an election-year comment, but
hoped that the President does not truly believe that progress with
Hungary has been made because of U.S. pressure. “I know the whole
story back 10–15 years, and I know our people—that’s a most sensitive
point.” Pressure leads to a negative reaction. Esztergalyos worried
19, the Embassy reported Ridgway’s conversation with Ministry of Foreign Affairs State
Secretary Nagy on June 16. Nagy, the Embassy reported, “stated that the long term
continuation of tension between the U.S. and USSR will cause Hungary problems. If
Hungary is forced to withdraw into ‘its own world again,’ it will not be helpful to either
Hungary or the U.S.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800301–
with Puja. The discussion with the Foreign Minister, the Embassy reported, focused on
the Iranian hostage crisis, NATO-Warsaw Pact relations, and Afghanistan. (National

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
that the President’s remark would give encouragement to circles in
Congress which oppose abolition of the requirement for annual review
of Hungary’s most-favored-nation tariff status, and to certain Hungar-
ian-American circles. Esztergalyos said the latter would pose problems
“not for Hungary, but for the Department.” The Counselor took note
of the Ambassador’s comments, recalling that an Hungarian Embassy
officer had earlier raised the question in EUR/EE.
5. CSCE/Madrid. The Counselor asked about the Hungarian dele-
gation’s position at Madrid. Ezstergalyos replied that:
(A) Hungary does not want to see Madrid become a “mudslinging
forum” since this “would kill the whole process.” It would be better
to have discussions without illusions.
(B) Disarmament will be a main issue in the political field. Hungary
is willing to accept that Madrid should not be used as a disarmament
forum, but hopes for a kind of post-Madrid mandate to discuss this
key issue.
(C) Hungary also seeks how to resolve larger common European
projects such as energy, water resources, communications, and trans-
portation issues. Progress in such areas pays not only economic but
political dividends in contributing to reduction of tensions and to
greater understanding. Esztergalyos said the idea would not be to
institutionalize such project discussions since institutions come to fend
for themselves, but a start could be made at Madrid. He cited the
Hamburg scientific forum as having shown an interest and willingness
to start.
6. The Counselor said that the U.S. regarded the Hamburg experi-
ence as very important for Madrid. While the public may focus on the
CSCE biennial reviews, day-by-day gradual progress is the real CSCE
“process.” There had been a vigorous exchange of views at Hamburg.
While there had been no agreement on implementation, there had been
a candid discussion and a final document. The U.S. looks at Madrid
in the same way. We have no desire to be confrontational, but we
should be candid, thorough, and have a full review. We will focus on
balance of all aspects of the Final Act.
7. Esztergalyos agreed that all three baskets are a unified whole.
He emphasized that actual fulfillment of individual Helsinki commit-
ments is a bilateral task between participants. He noted that it is helpful
that the November conference convenes only after the FRG and US
elections. Otherwise there would be pressure for electoral publicity-
plays. The Counselor responded that the Final Act was signed for the
U.S. by a Republican administration and has been implemented for
several years by a Democratic one, and that U.S. views on CSCE tran-
scend party lines.

Hungary
8. Economic and business topics. Esztergalyos reported his consul-
tations included an extensive discussion with Deputy Prime Minister
for Economics Marjai on US-Hungarian business relations. Esztergalyos
reported Hungary’s main economic task is to increase efficiency and
productivity and that 1979 through early 1981 is the crucial period. He
noted favorably that Hungary has gotten its debt-service ratio down
to about 20 percent.
9. Ridgway noted that although as a matter of policy the U.S. does
not seek to achieve bilateral trade balances, congressional and other
inquiries do arise. She hoped that in future years the mix of bilateral
agricultural versus industrial trade will evolve to a more stable situa-
tion. Esztergalyos responded that Hungary has a major interest in
entering into long-term relationships with U.S. firms, including some
Hungarian investments in the US, and in altering the basic structure
of bilateral trade. He noted that last year for the first time Hungarian
industrial exports exceeded agricultural ones, and said Hungary wants
to import more industrial goods than agricultural and raw materials.
10. Particular business issues.
(A) Chemical patents dispute. Esztergalyos said he had heard that a
Hungarian court ruling had recently gone against the Chinoin Chemical
enterprise. He said this proves what the Hungarian Government has
consistently maintained: that Hungarian courts and procedures are
objective and do not automatically favor the Hungarian party. Eszterga-
lyos said it is logical that as commercial relations expand, particular
problems will arise but it is important that—as was done regarding
the chemical patents disputes—both governments work to promote
solutions between the disputing firms and enterprises and not permit
things to become politicized.
(B) Rockwell/Raba. Esztergalyos said it appears clear that in its
MFN testimony last July Rockwell was trying to inject politics into a
purely competitive question. It resents seeing Raba get a foothold in
the United States with products as good as its own. Esztergalyos labeled
as significant Rockwell’s inability or unwillingness to answer Senator
Ribicoff’s question on how much business from it Raba’s new role is
taking away. He said Rockwell has been invited several times to Hun-
gary to discuss business prospects, including with Raba, but that some-
times companies seek to “win by political ways.” He said it was good
to see that Congress and STR, on the contrary, look at things objectively.
(C) Occidental. Esztergalyos reported that Occidental’s Armand
Hammer may come to Hungary in the fall to review a number of
prospective projects with Deputy Prime Minister Marjai and others.
11. Comment. Discussion was cordial and ran for 1¼ hours. There
were no particular surprises except that Esztergalyos raised the
President’s comment, which he did in low key and ostensibly on his

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
own and without instructions. Embassy will have received a memcon
of discussion in EUR/EE on that topic on August 21.4 End comment.
Muskie
4 Not found. In his August 14 speech accepting the Democratic Party’s presidential
nomination, Carter accused the Republicans of wanting to move away from his policy
of emphasizing human rights: “Ask the former political prisoners who now live in
freedom if we should abandon our stand on human rights. Ask the dissidents in the
Soviet Union about our commitment to human rights. Ask the Hungarian Americans,
ask the Polish Americans, listen to Pope John Paul II. Ask those who are suffering for
the sake of justice and liberty around the world. Ask the millions who’ve fled tyranny
if America should stop speaking out for human principles. Ask the American people. I
tell you that as long as I am President, we will hold high the banner of human rights,
174.
Telegram From the Embassy in Hungary to the Department
of State1
4840. Subject: Poland and Eastern Europe: Analysis and Policy
Implications. Ref: State 238732.2
1. (C-entire text)
2. We concur in the general thrust of the analysis presented in the
referenced message on how events in Poland may affect the USSR and
Eastern Europe. As it pertains specifically to Hungary, we agree with
the estimate that Poland’s uniqueness, for the various reasons stated,
makes it unlikely that there will be any dramatic spillover effect over
the short term. While Hungarians follow events in Poland with keen
attention, they invariably express the view that “Hungary is different”.
This, of course, is merely another way of stating that “Poland is differ-
ent”. Our interlocutors stress:
—The relative strength of the Hungarian economy and the attention
Hungarian leaders have long given to supplying the consumer sector.
Confidential. Immediate. Printed from a corrected copy.

Hungary
—The well managed and productive agricultural sector.
—The general, popular acceptance of the Hungarian Party’s
leadership.
—The scant politicization of Hungarian labor.
—The absence of links between workers and the small group of
intellectual dissidents.
—The cooperative (to the point of appearing co-opted) role of
Hungarian religious leaders.
—The relatively successful national alliance policies of Kadar’s
regime which have given even non-Communist Hungarians a sense of
national pride and participation in the country’s life.
3. Many Hungarians with whom we have talked look at the Polish
events through a local prism. The prism is small and reflects mostly
economics. Hungarian officials are not confident that events in Poland
have run their course, and that is naturally worrisome. Any argument
picturing what has happened this summer in Poland as being solely
about free trade unions is doubly worrisome because that, standing
alone, could combine political danger and economic ruin. Here they
would rather see Polish events in the context of economic reform, as
a vindication of Kadar and the economic reform program as elaborated
and pursued since 1968.
4. Although Poland in some ways provided the political backdrop
against which Hungarian reform was first made possible, Poland has
been regarded here as a foot-dragger. The importance of the Party and
government keeping its word is often heard and the Polish record of
broken promises to the workers held up in comparison to what is
claimed a perfect Hungarian record of promises kept. Communication
with the workers and keeping faith with them is seen as the foundation
for the Hungarian economic reform model which has at least these six
major components:
(A) A commitment to economic growth, not export led but with a
vigorous East and West export component.
(B) A modernized planning system which is both precise and flexi-
ble and does not fully allocate all resources.
(C) Less centralized control and more authority for local enterprise
management.
(D) An increased role for consumption, being critical not only for
public support, but, of equal importance, for expanding capital
formation.
(E) Allowing initiative to develop at all levels, through the profit
motive and profit sharing.
(F) Allowing the market to play a significant role in resource alloca-
tion and pricing.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
5. The Hungarians think this model is adaptable to most of their
partners, at least for those to the north. In their optimistic moments
they believe the Poles may now have opened the way and the Soviets
will have to swallow reform in the EE countries, even if it contains
heresies against Leninism, because the alternative options are just too
costly. The Hungarians will probably try to push their model to their
EE friends as they like to think the others live in envy of them and
they want recognition that Hungary has indeed been the pace-setter.
6. However, we very much doubt the larger EE countries, to whom
Hungary would like to appeal, will take that much notice of her.
Hungary is a fine place for a holiday and it’s true the shops are compara-
tively full, but what strikes the economist is smallness of scale. Moving
away from the command economy was less complex, could be under-
taken with a leadership that truly enjoys much public support, and
even so is incomplete after 12 years. The Hungarian accomplishment
has taken place during years of economic growth at home and in the
export sector has been supported by solid OECD growth. The years
of the 80s will probably not be big growth years and reform, even with
12 years of foundation, may not save the Hungarian economy, much
less make it a model for others.
7. The leadership still appears bent on going ahead with planned
economic reforms, but the adverse economic environment could affect
the speed and manner in which they are implemented. Hungary is
attempting to cope with mounting economic difficulties by seeking to
increase hard-currency exports, decrease consumer goods purchases
from the West, and reduce consumption. A period of zero or negative
economic growth with little improvement in the standard of living,
could seriously impair the regime’s standing in a society that has
derived political stability from the steady growth afforded the con-
sumer sector. Hungary’s outlook is thus clouded by serious economic
and political uncertainties.
8. Over the longer term, we agree that the events in Poland cannot
but have some impact on Hungary and other countries in the region.
This will be particularly true if the Polish liberalization succeeds (espe-
cially in the area of free trade union development); but it would also
be true in the case of a major reversal. We have had reports that workers
in some factories “discussed” the Polish situation, but this activity did
not extend to work stoppages or demonstrations. Particularly if the
Poles succeed, we believe it possible that Hungarian workers may
similarly demand a more democratic trade union structure. We suspect,
however, that the workers here will carefully weigh the potential eco-
nomic and social costs before engaging in any agitation. The memory
of 1956 remains strong in Hungary and will continue to act as a brake
on worker-initiated activity or reforms not closely concerted with the
party and governmental leadership.

Hungary
9. Finally, while the government and party can be expected to
prevent the formation of any coalition of dissidents and workers, we
do not believe that the regime will feel compelled to increase internal
vigilance or otherwise seek to insulate the populace from Western
influence. Throughout the Polish events, the Hungarian media followed
a deliberate policy of keeping the public informed of the main elements
of the situation.
10. Policy implications: We believe that the policy recommenda-
tions outlined for both the region and Hungary specifically are valid.
We see no need to alter our basic policy of differentiation (para 6–A).
Indeed, the GOH seems to have gotten over its post-Afghanistan jitters
and decided to go ahead with a full range of contacts with the West.
While our policies may need to be tuned to meet the requirements
of an evolving Polish situation, we see no need to make any major
readjustment in our approach here.
11. We agree we should continue to maintain the useful political
dialogue established in recent years with the Hungarians through
increased high-level visits. There are also new areas, such as energy,
that can be usefully exploited to maintain the momentum of an active,
differentiated policy toward this country. We agree we could be more
aggressive in expanding exchanges and cultural programs. We are
less certain, however, that international institutions can be effectively
utilized—at least for the present—to influence Hungarian behavior.
Despite indications of renewed interest in IMF membership, Hungary
is not yet a member. The ILO enjoys little influence on Hungarian
internal policies. In sum, we agree that the Hungarian situation should
be watched in the light of the Polish events to assure we take advantage
of opportunities for US policy initiatives but our assessment for now
is that we are on the right track.
Bergold

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
175.
Telegram From the Embassy in Hungary to the Department
of State1
6196. Subject: Official-Informal. EUR/EE only; three copies only.
For Bridges from Kuchel.
1. (U) Transition: Peter, we are most grateful for the background
information2 you have been giving us on the composition and interests
of the foreign affairs transition teams. The Ambassador and I find it
extremely helpful to have your comments which both amplify and
lend a little chiaroscuro to the wireless reports.
2. (C) We hope that the following appraisal of the current situation
in Hungary and US-Hungarian relations will be useful in preparing
your briefing paper on Hungary for the transition staff.
3. (C) Kadarism—Under Janos Kadar Hungary has forged a unique
position in Eastern Europe. During the past twenty-five years, Kadar
has brought Hungary out of the depression of a failed revolution and
into a period of sustained stability and general prosperity at home. The
essence of Kadar’s policies has been substantial, if sometimes nuanced,
support for Soviet foreign policy goals in exchange for a measure of
latitude to pursue internal reforms and a relatively relaxed social policy.
The success by Eastern European standards of the new economic mech-
anism in achieving prosperity at home and the politically adept imple-
mentation of Kadar’s National Alliance policy has allowed the Hungar-
ian Communist Party to achieve a level of legitimacy that few would
have imagined in 1956. By achieving compromises with religious insti-
tutions, permitting individual travel to the West every three years and
generally allowing Hungarians of all persuasions to work within the
system, Kadar has earned the acquiescence, if not the support of most
of Hungary’s population. Kadar’s famous dictum “Those who are not
against us are with us” remains the basis of the Hungarian Party’s
approach.
Confidential; Immediate.
Embassy of the transition papers proposed by the Bureau of European Affairs following
Reagan’s election. While Hungary did not figure as a separate topic, EUR/EE requested
that Budapest send suggestions of what might be included in a separate paper if one
In telegram 6142 from Budapest, November 21, the Embassy cabled a brief overview of
U.S.-Hungarian relations, concluding that it did not see any “pressing or immediate issues
in Hungarian-American relations that warrant isolated attention.” (National Archives,

Hungary
4. (C) Hungary in the 1980’s—Although Hungary’s economic per-
formance and management has been better than in most Eastern Euro-
pean countries, the nation will confront serious problems in the next
decade, over many of which the Hungarians have no control.
—As elsewhere in Eastern Europe, Hungary faces the prospect of
significantly decreased economic growth in the 1980’s. Hungary is
particularly vulnerable to international economic pressures, worldwide
inflation and the rising cost and uncertain availability of energy) since
it depends on imports for 80 percent of its raw materials and now
exports 50 percent of its GNP (25 percent of its trade is with the West).
—As a result, the next five-year plan projects only a 7–9 percent
increase in personal income. Over the last decade, however, the Hungar-
ian populace has been accustomed to steady, perceptible increases in the
standard of living. The political cost of a modest, albeit realistic, eco-
nomic strategy designed to preserve rather than improve existing life-
styles will be a major factor in the Hungarian leadership’s calculations
over the next five years. An austere economic policy could also hinder
the Party’s ability to implement fully the economic reform program.
—The Helsinki Final Act and relaxed East-West atmosphere of the
1970’s served as an umbrella by which Hungary promoted its economic,
political and cultural ties with Western Europe and the US. Any addi-
tional chill in East-West relations forcing a cutback of these relations
will have serious implications for Hungary.
—The uncertainties surrounding the Soviet succession and the pos-
sibility of the passing of the now 68 year old Kadar also raise questions
about the long-term outlook of Hungary. “Can Kadarism survive
Kadar?” remains an important question. Kadar has changed the per-
spectives of a generation of Hungarians and his overall approach has
been widely accepted. But many of his policies are more stylistic adapta-
tions of Communist policy rather than substantive institutional
changes. For the moment Kadar appears healthy enough. Most Hungar-
ians, however, prefer not to think about what might happen when
he goes.
5. (C) Implications of Polish events—The Hungarian Party has
reviewed the internal situation in the wake of Polish events. It has
congratulated itself on the efficacy of Kadar’s economic reform policies
but has also taken steps to promote a more aggressive, public role for
Hungary’s controlled trade unions. Underlying the Party’s professions
of confidence (bordering on smugness) that it has the situation under
control is a genuine fear that the Polish example could present a political
alternative and challenge to the Party. The Hungarian populace seems
to be impressed that the Polish workers have so far “got away with
it” by creating their own unions and base of power. The 1956 experience,
however, continues to condition the Hungarian perspective toward the

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
Soviet Union. Many continue to believe that in the end the Soviets
will not countenance the Polish challenge to Communist ideology and
control. The longer Lech Walesa and his colleagues maintain their
power, the greater the Polish example will influence Hungary.
6. US-Hungarian relations—The return of the Crown of St. Stephen
in January 1978 paved the way for a steady expansion of US-Hungarian
relations. The 1978 Trade Agreement, extension of MFN, the Cultural
Agreement and a steady exchange of high level visitors have resulted
in a significant increase in bilateral contacts across the board. The
Hungarians have responded to our own policy of differentiation in
Eastern Europe following the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. With the
exception of the postponement of a parliamentary delegation’s visit to
the US in February, the bilateral agenda has been almost completely
carried out to mutual advantage. The Embassy has been able to expand
contacts significantly in the Hungarian community and we have begun
exploring new areas of cooperation such as increased military contacts,
energy development and narcotics control. The Hungarians worry
about the possibility of continued stalemate or further deteriorations
in US-Soviet relations. This is compounded by the tenseness created
by the fluidity of the Polish situation. Nevertheless, Hungarians con-
tinue to emphasize their desire to see the bilateral agenda expand and
contacts with the U.S. increase. The future, barring a catastrophic East-
West confrontation such as Soviet intervention in Poland, two areas
deserve the attention of the new administration:
—High-level visits: Over a year ago the Hungarians noted the
possibility of a Kadar visit to the U.S. We have had recent indications
that the Hungarians will soon raise the question again.3 Depending on
the circumstances, a Kadar visit could serve not only to promote bilat-
eral relations with Hungary but also to demonstrate our interest in
Eastern Europe as a whole. They would also be pleased to have Presi-
dent Reagan visit Hungary if he were to make at least one other stop
in the Bloc.
—Improve economic relations: Trade between the U.S. and Hun-
gary now totals about $250 million per year (with a U.S. trade surplus).
The Hungarians hope that bilateral trade will surpass $500 million by
1985, bringing the U.S. from its current eighth position among Hunga-
his conversations with the British Ambassador to Hungary and with Hungarian officials
on the results of the visit by British Foreign Secretary Lord Carrington to Budapest.
Hungarian State Secretary Janos Nagy, praising the positive effects of the Carrington
visit, told the Ambassador that, following the U.S. elections, he would like to discuss
“the evolution of Hungarian-American relations, looking toward the possibility of high
level visits in each direction within the next several years.” (National Archives, RG 59,
Central Foreign Policy File, D800529–0185)

Hungary
ry’s Western trading partners to fourth behind the FRG, Austria and
Italy. Economic factors hindering increased commercial exchanges in-
clude a lack of dependable availability of parts and servicing for U.S.
equipment and Hungary’s need to conserve foreign exchange. Policy
issues influencing trade expansion include the annual U.S. review of
MFN status which Hungarians see as an impediment to long term trade
development and the U.S. failure in some cases to act expeditiously
on export license applications not involving strategic items.
Conclusion. Without losing sight of the overall geopolitical realities
which condition Hungary’s relationship with the U.S., we can say our
policy of differentiation has paid dividends. Hungary continues its
internal economic decentralization and increased use of market econ-
omy techniques. Its record of CSCE compliance, while still requiring
improvement, is second to none within the Soviet Bloc. The opportunity
for average Hungarians to travel to the West and be exposed to Western
culture at home continues to increase. All of these factors are in the
long-term interest of the United States. Encouraging their development
should continue to be at the core of our policy toward Hungary.
[Omitted here is information unrelated to Hungary.]
Bergold
176.
Telegram From the Embassy in Hungary to the Department
of State1
153. Subject: Ambassador’s Meeting With Mr. Gyula Horn, HSWP.
Ref: Budapest 0131.2
1. Horn and I had agreed to meet January 13 for a general review
of the international situation. Horn is Deputy Head of the HSWP Inter-
national Department; he specializes on Western countries and is adver-
Confidential; Priority; Exdis.
between Bergold and the State Secretary of the Hungarian Foreign Ministry, Janos Nagy.
Bergold reported that Nagy was optimistic about the Reagan administration, and believed
relations would return “to a more predictable and reliable atmosphere in East/West
relations associated with the early and middle seventies.” (National Archives, RG 59,
Central Foreign Policy File, D810017–0314)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
tised by many of our Hungarian contacts as the real “comer” on the
Central Committee Staff.
2. I went over much of the same ground that I covered with Nagy
yesterday and found Horn, if anything, more au courant than Nagy
about Washington developments, particularly the Haig testimony
before the Foreign Relations Committee. Horn said the HSWP had
been very worried about a Reagan victory up until the debate which
seemed to them to show Reagan’s position as more responsible than
Carter’s and he added that their positive feelings about the Reagan
administration have increased as they have read various statements of
the President-elect and his Cabinet-designates since the election.
3. Horn divided his comments into the following five areas:
—East/West relations—Horn emphasized what he called the
subjective factors here, which he thought gave some opportunity for
an improvement in US/Soviet relations, although he conceded that
Afghanistan and probably Poland would prevent those relations from
getting very much better in the near term. He said the Soviets had
become so disenchanted with Carter and Brzezinski that their very
removal from the scene is positive in that the Soviets will no longer
be able to dwell on them as personalities and will have to face new
personalities and hopefully “pay more attention to the issues.” He
thought the evolution of US/Soviet relations would take up most of
1981 given the US “structural impediments” (our political system) and
what he called Soviet preoccupation with “border issues”.
—(A) SALT—Horn said the Soviets will be looking early on for
some signals about what the U.S. intends to do on SALT even though
they and all other Warsaw Pact members acknowledge and understand
that SALT II will not be ratified in its present form. He pointed to the
need for some re-statement by the new administration of President
Carter’s assurances of a year ago that, pending ratification of SALT II,
the configuration of U.S. strategic forces would not violate the terms
of the draft treaty.
—(B) TNF—Horn characterized US/Soviet technical talks in
Geneva as a complete failure. He said he and others had accepted
what he called the “Genscher explanation” of the TNF modernization
decision made by NATO in December 1979, namely that the moderniza-
tion was needed to fill a gap in the FBS, both land-based air in Europe
and elements of the Sixth Fleet, which might be needed for deployment
in the Third World contingencies. However, he said it must be recalled
that TNF are “strategic” for the Warsaw Pact and that their moderniza-
tion will almost certainly drive the Soviets toward cruise missiles and
perhaps an ABM system to protect the SS–20 and oncoming SS–36. He
said that this spiraling process would enhance the power of the military
in the Soviet Union and would have a deleterious effect on openings
of pluralism and “democratic socialism” in the East European countries.

Hungary
—Madrid—Horn said that Hungary found the outcome in Madrid3
to be surprisingly good given the sulphurous atmosphere that prevailed
before the conference actually began. He admitted the true test was
yet to come. Although Hungary does not expect many of the 83 propos-
als on the table actually to be passed, they do hope for two things:
(1) that a continuation of the Helsinki process is assured with another
meeting scheduled within several years or some variant of the Finnish
proposal for an even more permanent process, and (2) that some sort
of a disarmament conference follow Madrid although they were not
very particular about its form. He did feel the French proposal was
totally negative.
—Differentiation—Horn said he hoped that the Reagan administra-
tion would not view the Communist world as a monolithic bloc. He
thought the Carter administration with its policy of differentiation was
basically on the right track but could have made even more headway.
He referred to a portion of General Haig’s testimony this week4 which
he interpreted to be a much more realistic viewpoint about China than
had characterized anything that Brzezinski had said on the subject.
Horn emphasized that Hungary wishes to make even more advances
towards opening up the system and sees the Polish situation as an
opportunity in that direction rather than a threat to the process.
—Poland—Horn said the Warsaw Pact Summit meeting of
December 5 had turned a new corner with respect to the Brezhnev
Doctrine; it was decided not to use force but to allow the Poles to
work out their own admittedly very difficult economic problems. He
characterized the bringing of Soviet and bloc forces to a higher defense
condition as political rather than military. Horn said he believed that
the Polish situation was also distinct from Hungary 1956 and Czecho-
slovakia 1968, in that it seemed that the interests of the Soviet Union,
the other Warsaw Pact states, the U.S., and NATO were coming to an
almost identical position, namely that nobody wanted to see tensions
rise in Poland and everyone wanted to see the Poles work out their
own problems, giving them a helping hand where appropriate. He
said he thought it was inconceivable that the Soviets would actually
invade Poland because such an action could do nothing to resolve the
Polish economic problems. He was, however, worried about Solidarity
and its search for “monopolistic power”.
3 For information on the CSCE Conference in Madrid, see Foreign Relations, 1977–
4 General Alexander Haig, Ronald Reagan’s Secretary of State-designate, testified
before the Senate Committee on Foreign Relations during his confirmation hearings
beginning January 9, 1981.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
4. Comment: Horn is a bright and articulate person whose com-
mand of English is really getting quite good although we used Miklos
Revesz, MFA desk officer, as interpreter for part of this conversation.
Given his interest in getting to know the new people in Washington,
I urged Horn to accept an ICA travel grant this spring or summer and
he said he would let us know. I think he actually reflects the concerns
of this small nation in the Warsaw Pact which still hopes to do business
with both sides. He is alternatively optimistic and pessimistic with
optimism slightly winning out.5 He and others in Budapest will be
looking for an early statement of the Reagan administration policy
towards this part of the world, as distinct from policy towards the
Soviet Union. Horn is much more worried about Poland than he let on
and I think his remarks about the monopolistic philosophy of Solidarity
reflect concern that the Polish Party is having trouble penetrating and
breaking away pieces of Solidarity.
Bergold
5 Horn took a much more pessimistic note in a early November conversation with
visiting EUR/EE director Peter Bridges, concentrating on the dangers developments in
Poland posed for East-West relations in general and U.S.-Hungarian relations in particu-
Central Foreign Policy File, D800534–0484)

Romania
177.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, February 22, 1977
MEETING WITH VASILE PUNGAN (Romania)
Wednesday, February 23, 1997
The Oval Office
I. PURPOSE
To receive a message he is carrying from President Ceausescu, and
to review the status and future of American-Romanian relations.
II. BACKGROUND, PARTICIPANTS & PRESS PLAN
A. Background: Mr. Pungan (age 50) occupies the position of chief
of the group of Presidential counselors; he combines both domestic
and international relations as a special advisor. Outside of the formal
party structure he ranks as Ceausescu’s senior advisor and trouble-
shooter. He has been used as a contact with both Presidents Nixon
and Ford. He speaks passable English, was formerly Ambassador to
close enough to Ceausescu that he can take up almost any subject and
speak with assurance. The current rumor is that he will become the
Foreign Minister.
His mission is to make an early contact with your administration
in order to reconfirm the “special” relationship that we have developed
with Romania over the past decade. This relationship, symbolized by
visits to Romania of Presidents Nixon and Ford, and return visits by
Ceausescu, has served the interests of both sides: for us it underscores
our willingness to deal with East European countries, independent of
Correspondence with Foreign Leaders File, Box 16, Romania: President Nicolae Ceau-
reported that Carter and Pungan discussed Romania’s position on several international
issues, including CSCE and disarmament, as well as Romanian desires for improved
relations with the United States. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
P850052–1843) During his visit, Pungan also met with other U.S. officials, including, on
February 22, Secretary of Commerce Juanita Kreps to discuss economic issues concerning
U.S.-Romanian trade, especially the possibility of eliminating the annual review of Roma-
Foreign Policy File, D770072–0554)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
the impact on Moscow, and to encourage those countries which have
had the temerity to take autonomous stands on foreign policy; for the
Romanians, we serve as a partial counterweight to the Soviets, and
as a demonstration that independence is reciprocated by mutually
advantageous relations, especially in commerce, and by enhancing the
voice of Romania in international councils.
Thus, by receiving Ceausescu’s special emissary early in your term,
you are demonstrating a basic continuity and our willingness to continue a
reasonably close relationship.
Beyond this general aspect, Pungan will be probing for a willing-
ness to invite Ceausescu to Washington, probably later in the year if
he visits Canada.
He will leave Washington for New York and then join Ceausescu,
who is currently touring West Africa.
B. Participants: Mr. Pungan will be accompanied by the Romanian
Ambassador Nicolae Nicolae; Vice President Mondale, Secretary
Vance, Zbigniew Brzezinski, and a notetaker.
C. Press Plan: The meeting has not been announced in advance;
after the meeting, Jody Powell could simply say that you received
Mr. Pungan as an emissary from President Ceausescu, and that you
discussed Romanian-American relations.
III. TALKING POINTS
American Romanian Relations
Economic: The main concern of the Romanians is that the new
Administration continue the policy of its predecessor in granting a
waiver under the Jackson-Vanik amendment that requires free emigra-
tion as a condition for Most Favored Nation treatment. As a result of
a carefully negotiated understanding, Romania permits a small emigra-
tion of Jews to Israel, which satisfies the letter of the law. Since this
waiver is granted under a Presidential finding, Pungan will probably
seek an indication that you will continue this policy. (In fact, emigration
has fallen off, but Israel is not yet concerned because it does not appear
to be a result of any internal crackdown.)
Technology-Nuclear: The Romanians are negotiating with Canada
for a nuclear reactor, and are seeking assurances that we will grant
licenses to American parts; they understand our non-proliferation prob-
lems, though Ceausescu recently told our Ambassador that Romania
could make nuclear weapons if it wished at any time (an exaggeration),
and that no one could foresee where technology would lead in ten
years. In any case, the Romanians have been clearly forewarned about
our reservations concerning a full fuel cycle or manufacture of
heavy water.

Romania
1. I want to assure President Ceausescu of the willingness of my
administration to develop mutually advantageous relations with
Romania; we respect Romania’s position of independence and this is
the basis on which we can continue, as in the past, with a beneficial
relationship.
2. Trade is one of the main points in our relations, and we expect
it to continue under the conditions worked out to comply with our
laws on Most Favored Nation treatment.
3. As for the export of technology, we regard it as politically signifi-
cant that Romania has turned to the West for the purchase of a nuclear
reactor; we will not place obstacles in the way of dealing with Canada,
but as our Ambassador has already told your President, we are deter-
mined not to permit the export of technologies that would facilitate
weapons development.
4. I hope that President Ceausescu has an occasion to visit the US
later in the year.
International Issues
Romania has developed an independent position on the Middle
East question, breaking with the Soviet line in 1967 and refusing to
denounce Israel. Subsequently, however, a more even-handed position
has emerged, and occasionally the Romanians put themselves forward
as possible intermediaries; for example, they might offer to carry mes-
sages to the PLO. In fact, we have used them as an indirect channel
to get our views across on the assumption that whatever we say they
will repeat to the Arabs.
Somewhat similarly, the Romanians offer their services in relaying
messages to the North Koreans, and even the Chinese, since they try
to take a semi-independent stand on the Sino-Soviet dispute.
Since Ceausescu is traveling in Africa, anything you may want to
say about the situation in southern Africa may also be taken into
account in his discussions there.
Finally, of course, the Romanians are deeply concerned with the
politics of the Soviet bloc, East-West issues such as the Helsinki agree-
ments, MBFR, and disarmament issues in general; Romanian represent-
atives are often helpful in giving us frank assessments and have cooper-
ated in preparing for Helsinki.
Romanian relations with Moscow have improved since Brezhnev’s
visit in November. They are always fragile, however, and depend on
Soviet restraint in not pressing for greater Romanian integration in the
Warsaw Pact.
1. I would appreciate hearing your analysis of how you believe
European security issues may develop. For our part we are serious

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
about making progress in arms control—specifically SALT, mutual
force reductions in Central Europe and a test ban. Moreover, we want
the preparatory conference in Belgrade for the review of the Helsinki
Accords to yield real progress; we would welcome your suggestions
on how these issues could be advanced, in particular, what the situation
will be in Yugoslavia after Tito.
Human Rights
In the last week, the Romanians have found themselves confronted
by the first sign of public dissent by their intellectuals. A well known
Romanian novelist Paul Goma issued an open letter signed by eight
others, not as well known outside Romania. The letter expressed soli-
darity with the Czech Charter 77, and an appeal to the Government
for human rights. Ceausescu responded immediately with a strong
denunciation (without naming names). But the protestors have not
been arrested (as erroneously reported in the Western press). On the
other hand, the Romanians claim they are granting free emigration
(more than 5,000 in January–February), but the real figure for 1976 was
about 3,000.
Almost certainly this subject will not be raised by Pungan, but you
may wish to advert to it.
1. The defense of human rights is a matter of principle with this
country, and we will not hesitate to speak our mind when the situation
warrants it.
2. We are not linking our concerns to specific policies nor embarking
on a moralistic crusade, but it is best that there be no misunderstanding
of our intentions.
Attached is an advance copy of Ceausescu’s letter (Tab B[A?]).2
Additional background and briefing material from the Department
of State is at Tab B.3
delivered Carter’s signed response to Ambassador Nicolae. (Carter Library, National
77) The text of the letter was transmitted to the Embassy in Bucharest in telegram
65360, March 24, with instructions that the Ambassador seek an early appointment with
Ceausescu to review the points made in Carter’s letter. (National Archives, RG 59, Central
Foreign Policy File, P850052–1846)
3 Attached but not printed is a February 21 memorandum from Christopher to
Carter.

Romania
178.
Telegram From the Embassy in Romania to the Department
of State1
2608. Subj: PARM—Annual Policy and Resource Assessment—
A. U.S. interests in Romania
We define the principal long term U.S. interests as:
—Maintenance and enlargement of Romanian independence from
the Soviet Union.
—Reduction of restrictions on human rights.
These interests are not new. What I see as new is a willingness to
pursue both of them with greater energy, despite some greater risks.
They need to be seen in the context of a still broader U.S. interest, valid
not only in Romania but throughout Eastern Europe, of undermining
Soviet control—carefully, but consciously.
B. Overview
Current policies have helped promote these interests. The successes
are there: Two way trade is up. Substantial numbers of family reunifica-
tion cases are solved, useful high level visits take place, new agreements
are signed. We are in for a rough period, however, as we try to promote
simultaneously both our principal interests, with only one of which
Ceausescu is in accord.
Romanian-Soviet relations—For the past decade or so, Romanian
leaders for their own reasons have pursued a policy of relative inde-
pendence from the Soviet Union. They have shown themselves adept
at sensing the limits of Soviet tolerance, while at the same time maneu-
vering adroitly to expand them. We do not foresee a basic change in
this policy, in spite of a heavily publicized “rapprochement” with the
Soviets beginning in mid-1976, nor do we foresee an internal economic
crisis of such magnitude that Ceausescu would have no place to turn
except to the Soviet Union, paying whatever cost in terms of Romanian
independence the Soviets demand. A post-Brezhnev succession strug-
gle would undoubtedly cause considerable uneasiness here, but we
Secret. Sent for information to Belgrade, East Berlin, Budapest, Moscow, Prague, Sofia,
Warsaw, Bonn, Athens, Ankara, Tel Aviv, Paris, West Berlin, USNATO, USUN, and
pouched to Munich.
instructions for the format of the annual policy review and resource assessment. (National

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
would also expect Ceausescu to try to take advantage of Soviet internal
problems to expand his maneuvering room as in the immediate post-
Khrushchev era.
Eastern European context—We see Romania as the least likely of
the Eastern European countries to be affected by the ups and downs
of U.S.–USSR relations. Leaving aside a serious post-Tito disintegration
of Yugoslavia, Romania is also less likely to be influenced by the general
effervescence of a restive region. Except for Bulgaria, however, it is
also potentially the most susceptible in Eastern Europe to internal
ferment because so relatively little has taken place and the sparks could
come from outside. We definitely agree with the S/P assumption that
planning be done for a broadening of U.S. relations with the countries
of Eastern Europe, so as to position ourselves to take advantage of
opportunities as they arise. At the same time we assume the USSR and
some individual countries like Romania will, perhaps almost in rhythm
with CSCE, resort to a policy of increasing ideologicalization to “pro-
tect” their peoples against hostile influences.
Romania’s international role—We anticipate no diminution of
Romania’s active and often frenetic pursuit of cordial relations with
all Communist countries and parties, Balkan cooperation, courtship of
the Third World, strengthened ties with the countries and economic
institutions of the developed West, disarmament, a new international
political/economic order, the role of “honest broker” in such crisis
situations as the Middle East or Korea—all designed somehow to raise
the cost to the Soviets of any drastic behavior toward Romania, to
obtain both increased quantities of raw materials or access to markets
to dispose of manufactured products, and to establish Romania’s cre-
dentials as a “developing” country eligible for trade preferences and
easy credits.
Internal factors—With his overriding goal of perpetuating himself
in power, Ceausescu has built a highly centralized system in which he
exerts total control subject only to very general limits. For the next
year or two, we see practically no chance of his being unseated in a
party power struggle or of being forced from office by explosive discon-
tent among the populace. His internal approach is based more on his
perception of how Romania should be governed than on worries about
Soviet pressure. Nonetheless we believe, even if Ceausescu doesn’t,
that present controls could be substantially relaxed without risking
either Soviet intervention or spontaneous internal combustion. There
is no doubt that Romania’s rapid pace of industrialization has strained
the social fabric, produced large inefficiencies and misallocation of
resources, and produced a potentially serious energy crisis. Ceausescu’s
post-earthquake policy of meeting and exceeding five year plan goals
while at the same time recouping the losses and providing for

Romania
unplanned needs in such areas as housing will place even more burdens
on the populace. Nevertheless barring another natural disaster, we do
not expect that these strains will reach a crisis point during the assess-
ment period. For one thing, Romanians traditionally accept their fate
and improvise to get by from day to day. For another, even with its
inefficiencies, the Romanian economy is still the fastest growing in
Eastern Europe. The hard currency debt position is manageable. There
has been a gradual improvement in the standard of living which pro-
vides some room for maneuver. As in his dealings with the Soviets,
Ceausescu is aware of the limits to which he can push the people
and is sufficiently flexible to back off in the face of serious economic
discontent.
Human rights—This is a trickier area to predict than the economic
one if only because dissidence is so recent a contemporary Romanian
phenomenon. Small though it may also be, we anticipate Ceausescu
will continue to be plagued by it so long as there is any continuing
CSCE process and his dexterity will be put to a greater test because
dissidence challenges the legitimacy of his regime. Ceausescu’s natural
tendency will be to tighten controls, if only because he probably believes
relatively few in Romania are prepared to do that much about their
rights.
Romanian-U.S. relations—Our leverage so far has been small. It
derives from Romania’s own desire for independence from the Soviet
Union as well as for access to advanced Western technology and finan-
cial institutions. It also serves Ceausescu’s personal and national ambi-
tions to have, and to be seen to have, a close working relationship with
a series of U.S. Presidents. The foregoing does not imply that Ceausescu
needs us to survive. He clearly does not. Many of his political goals
are already being met in Romania’s relationships with other countries,
and he can obtain many of the economic benefits he seeks from other
Western countries with equal or greater ease. Our relationship in many
ways has been more symbolic than substantive, but that is beginning
to change and will change still more—and our leverage may increase—
if Congress votes reconstruction aid for Romania. Day-to-day relations
on most levels are reasonably businesslike, sometimes cordial as well,
but in other ways have become considerably more difficult and frustrat-
ing because of a tighter internal situation. In areas which Romania
considers peripheral (e.g. the exchange program), it only half-heartedly
will go along with many of the things we would like to do, while in
areas in which there are real conflicts of interests (e.g. human rights/
humanitarian questions) extracting positive and continuing action
requires the use of a considerable amount of our limited leverage. The
interplay between our human rights concerns and Romanian internal
restrictiveness assures continuing tensions between us. While our long

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
term interest is enlargement of human rights, we may be lucky to be
able just to help modify the restrictive tendencies.
Romanian leverage on the United States is so far not great. Romania
has no raw materials or industrial products which are vital to the U.S.
economy. While some Romanian petroleum and petroleum products
are presently being shipped to the New England area, this is a small
fraction of our total imports which could readily be purchased else-
where. The Romanian market for U.S. exports at present is small,
but it could grow appreciably in the next few years. Their greatest
leverage is in their knowledge that we also have an interest in their
independence.
C. Objectives, issues, and courses of action
1. Objectives
We see the following as key U.S. objectives for the next one or two
years:
—An active but candid relationship with the Romanian leadership
based on mutual respect and understanding of each other’s interests.
—Expanded contacts and mutual involvement between individu-
als, institutions, and bureaucracies of both countries in order to widen
and solidify the regime’s stake in successful cooperation with the West.
—Improved Romanian performance on the human rights issues
embodied in Helsinki Basket III and the Jackson/Vanik Amendment.
—Moving economic-commercial relations faster toward the one
billion dollar 1980 goal, especially through increased U.S. penetration
of the Romanian market with our industrial goods.
These objectives are basically similar to those contained in last
year’s policy assessment (76 Bucharest 2230), but, unlike last year, we
do not see them in any particular order of priority since they are closely
interrelated and mutually reinforcing.
2. Issues
“Pecking order”—We believe that it is no longer useful to maintain
a set “pecking order” in our relations with the countries of Eastern
Europe other than in terms of our inherent interests. We should position
ourselves so that if there is an opportunity for moving ahead anywhere
we could do so. This, we realize, will call for more flexibility than we
usually have allowed ourselves. We believe that, because of the U.S.
presence already established in Romania and the extensive though
admittedly often erratic opportunities which that affords, our bilateral
relationship will continue to be one of the most active in Eastern Europe,
with or without a “pecking order.”
Foreign policy independence v. internal liberalization—There
seems to be no set formula in Eastern Europe for prescribing the neces-
sary inter-relationship between these two factors. Thus during Ceauses-

Romania
cu’s regime, a period of relative foreign policy independence from the
Soviet Union, there has been only one period of substantial internal
relaxation (68–70), although the scene still much more relaxed than in
the 50’s. As to our own relations with Romania or any other East
European state, we see no need to prescribe a set formula either. It is
in our interest to encourage both independence, especially national
independence, and liberalization for their own sakes, but also because
they erode Soviet control. We should not be overly “rewarding” or
ignoring one kind of behavior over another but rather be using our
influence to work toward each, recognizing that in a country like Roma-
nia liberalization will come harder. We need to keep reviewing our
operational definition of “internal liberalization” which has been
focused almost entirely on emigration and only marginally on the right
of dissent, minority rights, religious freedom, and freer exchange of
information. So far we have correctly in our judgment made no sus-
tained effort to modify the other repressive features of Romania’s inter-
nal regime other than through our support of RFE. Given the limited
leverage we are likely to have on this most sensitive of areas a carefully
calculated approach, using CSCE to the maximum, is the most realistic
one. Ceausescu knows well the U.S. concerns in this area but is not
going to give much on his own restrictive approach. If dissidence
increases here and repression too, we may need to speak out about
Romanian practices as we now do about Soviet ones. Frequent and
candid contacts at all levels of the type we have had in the past are
the best guarantee of keeping things in perspective. It is worth thinking
in this context of the leverage the possibility of a meeting with the
President later this year might have on Ceausescu.
U.S. immigration/emigration policy
Because of Jackson/Vanik and CSCE we intercede forcefully in
individual emigration cases and in general for freer movement. On the
other hand, we are forced to work within the bounds of an immigration
law which is both restrictive in spirit and letter. To many Romanians,
the U.S. position on human rights translates into a U.S. endorsement
of their “right” to leave Romania and to live in the United States. Some
of these people are not qualified for an immigrant visa with consequent
embarrassment to us. This contradiction has caused us to establish
such expedients as the Rome TCP program which, although it does
allow us to process many additional (but not all) types of cases, does
not eliminate the basic dilemma which is reconciling our humanistic
traditions with our unemployment situation. There is a comparable
contradiction between our advocacy of unrestricted travel and our
barring of CP members. We applaud the President’s decision to study
these problems, and hope a new consensus, which will obviously

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
require legislation, can be reached soon. Coordination of our policies
with those of other Western countries is also worth undertaking.
A related issue is that of emigration of Romanian Jews to Israel or
Romanian Germans to the FRG. We are expending more of our limited
leverage on the Jewish emigration question than on any other single
item and the Israelis are understandably perfectly content to let us
continue to carry the ball. We believe that more balance has to be
achieved and our efforts should at most equal those of Israel or any
other third state.
[Omitted here is more specific discussion of U.S. goals and the
likely reactions of the Romanian Government.]
Barnes
179.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
Romania1
104105. Subject: Human Rights in Romania—Nimetz/Nicolae
1. Summary: Counselor Nimetz told Ambassador Nicolae that cur-
rent Romanian crackdown, if continued, would likely become public
irritant in US-Romanian relations. Counselor also said Carter-Ceau-
sescu meeting be most difficult to arrange under present circumstances,
but might be considered at appropriate time. Nicolae presented lengthy
exposition of Romanian viewpoint, implying that US is seen as under-
mining Romanian internal discipline. End summary.
2. Counselor Nimetz called in Ambassador Nicolae alone May 5
to express administration concern at recent Romanian crackdown on
dissidents and anti-US press campaign. Deputy Assistant Secretary
Analysis for the Commonwealth and Eastern Europe, Office Subject Files, 1965–1980,
cleared by Armitage and in S/S; approved by Nimetz.
ingly repressive nature of the Romanian regime. Barnes suggested that the ongoing
crackdown and anti-Western media campaign was decided by Ceausescu himself and
that, with regard to Ceausescu’s internal policies, the U.S. ability to influence a positive
outcome was very limited. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,

Romania
Armitage and Desk Officer Silins also participated. Meeting lasted just
over one hour.
3. Counselor said we are troubled and distressed by events of recent
months in Romania, particularly by what appears to be purposeful
anti-US press campaign and arrest and imprisonment of persons such
as Goma, Georgescu and Ton who appear to be doing nothing more
than speaking in support of Helsinki principles. Counselor noted that
both he and Armitage had testified before House International
Relations Committee in support of earthquake aid and, in response to
several questions on human rights in Romania, had painted generally
favorable picture and said we know of no imprisonments. So far the
present situation has not become a major public issue, and we have
not made any public statements. President Carter and Secretary Vance
have made clear the US is not interested in interfering with or overturn-
ing other governments, but have made it equally clear US must speak
out when clear violations of human rights are involved. We would not
want to have public issue on human rights in Romania unless absolutely
necessary, but with MFN renewal process, earthquake aid appropria-
tion, and Belgrade Conference coming up, questions are bound to arise,
and it will be difficult to avoid comment. We are confused by these latest
Romanian actions because we do not perceive threat to the Romanian
leadership, which appears popular and strong. Nor do we believe the
US has caused any affront to Romania which would justify the anti-
US press campaign. We hope the situation can be cleared up so as to
avoid a public debate; hence this private talk.
Armitage added that some of those arrested have expressed a
desire to leave Romania; obviously the reaction in the US will be
different if people are allowed to leave than if they received harsh
sentences.
4. Nicolae replied that Romanian interest in good relations with the
US remains high. President Ceausescu had reaffirmed this to Nicolae
during his recent consultations in Bucharest. GOB also appreciates US
offer of earthquake aid. However, it is important to keep in mind
Romanian interests. As Foreign Minister Macovescu had explained to
Ambassador Barnes, GOR was surprised at “unpleasant attitude” of
US newspapermen, which caused certain articles to go beyond criticism
to insult.3 Even “sensitive matters” had been reported on, such as
anti-American campaign in the Romanian media and the meeting on April 3 between
Barnes and Macovescu on the subject. Macovescu explained that Romania felt the need
to strike back as a result of negative stories in the U.S. press and negative RFE reporting
and commentary. Macovescu accused the U.S. Government of intentionally planting
anti-Romanian stories in the U.S. press, and accused the U.S. press of focusing on negative
aspects of the post-earthquake recovery and attacking President Ceausescu personally.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
alleged killing of woman by Ceausescu motorcade. Nicolae maintained
this report was false. Continuing his lengthy rebuttal (partly in Roman-
ian), Nicolae touched on US press reports that Romanian people are
being forced to work weekends; reference to “concentration camps”
in Romania (by which he presumably meant short article which referred
to “labor camps”); RFE broadcasting of Goma’s telephone number; and
US emphasis on specific human rights cases, as opposed to general
principles. Thrust of his presentation was that in order to meet develop-
ment goals, which are precondition for Romania’s ability to deal equal
terms with other countries, including “Socialist” ones, GOR must act
very prudently in mobilizing population. By implication, US is making
internal discipline more difficult to maintain. Further, Romania cannot
accept any interference in internal affairs. Which can take various forms
and be interpreted in different ways by different countries (i.e. USSR).4
Keeping in mind Romania’s geographic position, Romanian leadership
remains confident but must also be prudent.
4. In part of conversation he emphasized was “unofficial,” Nicolae
said he knew something about Ton’s status but not the others men-
tioned. Ton, he said, had done something “very bad for relations
between the Romanian Baptist Church and the Romanian authorities”:
he sent a letter to RFE “explaining various cases.” Other Romanian
Baptists, not the GOR, had removed Ton as pastor in Ploiesti for this
reason. However, Ton is at present not rpt not under arrest; he is being
allowed to conduct religious services at “some churches” in Bucharest.
Nicolae also stressed the general point that if some persons had been
arrested in Romania, which was possible, it was because they had
clearly violated Romanian law by doing something more than simply
criticizing GOR, which was not illegal. Therefore, such arrests were an
internal matter, not a proper subject for international debate.
5. Counselor responded that US also recognizes need to be prudent
in these matters and sympathizes to some extent with problem Romania
faces. We are not attempting to interfere in Romania’s domestic affairs,
nor are we discussing the legal aspects of the cases mentioned; rather,
our concern is with the possible problem in our relations caused by
arrests of persons for supporting Helsinki principles or for religious
activity. US press is not controlled by anyone; general earthquake
coverage was highly sympathetic. Perhaps GOR is too sensitive about
press items. On other hand, deliberate selection of negative items about
4 In a March 7 intelligence information cable, the CIA reported that, in late February,
the Romanian Foreign Ministry instructed all Romanian missions abroad not to issue
visas to U.S. legislators unless authorized by the Foreign Ministry and refrain from any
contact with U.S. Senators investigating human rights issues. (National Archives, RG
59, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Office of Analysis for the Commonwealth and

Romania
US, even if taken (as Nicolae claimed) from US press, reflects GOR
policy and is interpreted accordingly by Romanian people. Nicolae
said there is no place for anti-Americanism in Romanian policy, but
the “increasing presentation of realities in capitalist countries is because
of increasing presentation of Romanian realities in Western press.”
6. Nicolae said it was important to look to the future course of
relations between Romania and US. In this connection, it was important
to arrange a meeting in the near future between Presidents Carter and
Ceausescu, so they could discuss issues directly. Ceausescu is very
interested in meeting Carter, preferably in Romania, where he could
get some first-hand impressions. Counselor replied that first months
of new administration are difficult time to arrange such travel, but
perhaps it could be discussed at an appropriate time. Under present
circumstances, in view of events such as arrest of a Baptist pastor and
professor who had studied in US, it would be impossible to propose
such a visit. Counselor and Armitage both pointed out that our intent
in this meeting was to be sure that President Carter’s views on human
rights were clearly understood and to underline that it was important
for our relations that handling of cases of those arrested for defense
of Helsinki obligations be restrained. Otherwise, public confrontation
might ensue. We asked that Nicolae convey this message to President
Ceausescu with whom US leaders had enjoyed such good relations.
Christopher
180.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, undated
SUBJECT
Romanian Trade: Presidential Waiver
The Trade Act of 1974, as amended by the Jackson-Vanik provision,
requires a Presidential waiver to extend Most Favored Nation (MFN)
treatment and government sponsored credits to any “socialist” country.
for action. Hyland forwarded it under a covering memorandum to Brzezinski on May
26. Printed from a copy that does not bear Brzezinski’s initials.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
Your determination and waiver must be received by the Congress by
to continue the Presidential waiver authority, as provided for under
the law; this permits you to grant MFN to a communist country if you
find that doing so will promote the objectives of the law, i.e., freer
emigration; and (2) a specific waiver of the law as applied to Romania so
that the US-Romanian Trade Agreement of 1975 will continue in force.
In the past it has seemed clearly in our national interest to exempt
Romania from the Jackson-Vanik provisions, which were directed
against the USSR. Recently, however, there has been some growing
concern that Romania was not permitting emigration and was harden-
ing its internal repression. Fifty-five Congressmen sent you a letter
indicating such concerns.2 Nevertheless, emigration to Israel continues
at a rate (undetermined) that is satisfactory to the Israeli government,
which concluded a secret arrangement with Romania. And emigration
to the US has actually increased in the years since the waiver was
first granted.
Secretary Vance recommends that you extend the waiver to Roma-
nia for another 12 months, and that you also recommend the general
extension of the waiver provision (Vance memo is at Tab C).3
RECOMMENDATION
1. That you sign the Presidential determination at Tab A, that
extends the general waiver provisions.4
2. That you sign the specific waiver for Romania and the message
to the Congress at Tab B.5
2 Not attached.
3 Not attached.
5 The President signed the specific extension of the waiver for Romania on June 2.

Romania
181.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to Secretary of State Vance1
Washington, July 27, 1977
SUBJECT
Visit from the Romanian Ambassador
Prior to going home on leave, the Romanian Ambassador called
on me to say goodbye. He raised two specific points:
—He expressed concern that out of the $20 million US relief funds
for Romania, only $7 million have been “handed over”. Can something
be done to expedite this?2
—He expressed a very strong hope that President Ceausescu could
come and visit with President Carter. He pleaded for this year, but
obviously would be satisfied with something next year. In my view,
a visit by Ceausescu would be useful. How do you feel about it? Should
we put in a recommendation for the President?
Zbigniew Brzezinski
Office File, Country Chron File, Box 45, Romania: 1977. Secret.
2 On July 29, Treverton sent a memorandum to Brzezinski with an update on the
situation for aid to Romania. He reported that Representative Clarence Long was holding
the supplemental appropriation bill in the Appropriation Committee, despite having no
objections to it, and urged Brzezinski to call Long. (Ibid.) On August 4, Treverton again
wrote Brzezinski, urging a call to Speaker O’Neill to ask the Speaker to intervene with
Long. Treverton wrote: “Romania has been extremely cooperative in the CSCE Prepara-
tory Conference; it was, in several cases, a more fervent advocate of Western positions
than were the Allies themselves.” (Ibid.)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
182.
Report Prepared in the Bureau of Intelligence and Research,
Department of State1
No. 843
Washington, August 18, 1977
CEAUSESCU’S LEADERSHIP POSITION
Summary
Romanian President and party boss Nicolae Ceausescu has concen-
trated more power in his own hands than has any other Warsaw
Pact leader; his control of the party and state apparatus is seemingly
unassailable. There have been indications, however, of a steady erosion
in the extent of support he enjoys both within the party and among
the population at large.
Ceausescu’s handling of the aftermath of the earthquake which
struck Romania in March—he completely dominated the relief and
reconstruction activities—highlighted and increased the gap between
him and the rest of the party leadership. Since then, his intensification of
an already blatant personality cult and his failure to modify unpopular
economic policies have further alienated a dissatisfied public. The June
13 riot at Bucharest’s “August 23” stadium and the coal miners’ strike
in western Romania in early August reflect a considerable degree of
popular frustration and anger.
Although no immediate challenge to Ceausescu’s leadership posi-
tion is likely, his isolation probably will grow, further hampering effec-
tive policy formulation and implementation. Within the next few years
the resulting pressures could pose serious problems for Romania’s
political stability.
Ceausescu’s Leadership Style
Ceausescu remains Eastern Europe’s most unusual Communist
leader, integrating nationalism and Marxism in a uniquely Romanian
blend. His domestic policies in recent years (he has ruled Romania for
12) increasingly have departed in significant ways from prevailing
Soviet and East European norms. These deviations, while less publi-
cized than his foreign policy initiatives, may be of greater importance
in the long run for Romania’s stability and policy orientation.
Analysis for the Commonwealth and Eastern Europe, Office Subject Files, 1958–1978,
Rackmales; approved by Mautner.

Romania
Broadly speaking, the new internal political actions introduced by
Ceausescu fall into four interrelated categories:
—promotion of a “cult of personality” on a scale unparalleled in
Eastern Europe since the 1950’s;
—frequent shifts of personnel between party and state organs, and
between Bucharest and the rest of the country;
—gradual dilution of the prestige and authority of key party
organs, such as the Central Committee; and
—blurring of party and state functions and the creation of new
mass organizations with vaguely defined mandates.
Ceausescu’s mastery of political maneuver has enabled him to
manage these changes so as to concentrate more and more power in
his own hands.2 The centralization and personalization of decisionmak-
ing in Romania has reached the point where Ceausescu overshadows
not only the other members of the leadership but also the party and
state institutions themselves. Most observers agree, however, that the
decline of the prestige and effectiveness of these institutions has not
been accompanied by a corresponding increase in popular or party
support for Ceausescu or his policies.
Such support was at its peak following Ceausescu’s courageous
defiance of the Soviet Union at the time of the 1968 invasion of Czecho-
slovakia and the subsequent dramatic opening to the United States
symbolized by President Nixon’s visit to Bucharest in August 1969.
The enthusiasm that these gestures evoked in Romania facilitated
Ceausescu’s drive to consolidate his personal power, but the gradual
stabilization of Romanian relations with the two superpowers since
1970 has reduced the role of nationalism as a means of winning popu-
lar allegiance.
As patriotic euphoria has declined, increasing public disillusion-
ment with Ceausescu’s economic policies has surfaced. Living stand-
ards in Romania rank well below those in the other East European
countries. The level of personal consumption is estimated to be 50
percent lower than that in neighboring Bulgaria, and the absence of
adequate health care is reflected in an infant mortality rate that is the
highest of any Warsaw Pact country. These shortcomings are the result
partly of historical factors (Romania at the end of the Second World
War faced particularly severe problems of rural over-population and
general economic backwardness), but it is the regime’s investment
2 Ceausescu is now President of the Socialist Republic of Romania, General Secretary
of the Romanian Communist Party, President of the Council of State, Chairman of the
Socialist Unity Front, Chairman of the Defense Council and Supreme Commander of
the Armed Forces, Chairman of the Supreme Council of Economic and Social Develop-
ment, and Chairman of the Ideological Commission of the Romanian Communist Party.
[Footnote is in the original.]

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
policy favoring maximum expansion of heavy industry at the expense
of the consumer which is increasingly seen as the major cause of the
lagging standard of living.
Against this background, the earthquake that struck Romania last
March provides a useful focal point for an assessment of Ceausescu’s
leadership.
Ceausescu’s Leadership in Action
Ceausescu faced his most dramatic leadership test in years when
an earthquake measuring 7.2 on the Richter scale struck Romania on
made homeless; Bucharest and some provincial centers were damaged
extensively. The extent of the disaster drew all elements of the party
and government leadership into relief and reconstruction activities,
but it was Ceausescu who directed and completely dominated the
process. No other official was delegated meaningful authority or per-
mitted to receive public recognition for his contribution.
When the earthquake struck, Ceausescu was in Nigeria completing
a five-country African tour; thus the initial emergency actions were
taken by others. Ceausescu, who was on the scene within 18 hours,
lost no time in publicly criticizing “certain responsible factors for short-
comings in the organization of urgent acting to eliminate the effects of
the earthquake.” Privately, according to a clandestine report, Ceausescu
angrily reproached most of the top party leaders, accusing them of
being “utterly confused” after the earthquake struck. The earthquake’s
initial effect on the leadership was, therefore, not to promote solidarity
in the face of disaster, but to increase the gap between Ceausescu and
his colleagues.
Ceausescu’s subsequent management of the relief effort provided
further evidence of his ingrained distrust of party institutions. On
March 5, it was announced that the nine-man Permanent Bureau of
the party’s top-level Political Executive Committee (Polexco) would
“function as command center” for all earthquake-related activity. That
decision was never implemented; instead, the full 34-man Polexco,
acting as a “political staff,” met daily to “lead and organize the struggle
against the effects of the earthquake.”3 The language of the Polexco
daily communiques left no doubt, however, that on key decisions the
Committee merely rubber-stamped Ceausescu’s “recommendations.”
3 The reason for the change is unclear, but it probably reflects Ceausescu’s known
dislike for anything that smacks of collegial leadership. [Footnote is in the original.]

Romania
The Cult of Personality Intensifies
The earthquake provided Ceausescu with an unparalleled opportu-
nity to display his complete dominance of party and state activity. The
press provided saturation coverage of his highly visible control of relief
and rescue operations, which extended to personal supervision of (and
sometimes participation in) individual rescue operations. Praise of
Ceausescu’s “titanic” leadership reached a new pitch of intensity. The
eulogies even took on quasi-religious overtones, as when the Foreign
Minister announced that the “miracle” of recovery from the earthquake
did not come from heaven but from “the great force of mobilization
and action of our party Secretary General Nicolae Ceausescu whose
example in those tragic days has already entered the heroic history of
our people.”
Attempts were also made to include Ceausescu’s wife Elena
(appointed to the Permanent Bureau in January) in this glorification
campaign. The increasingly prominent role played in recent years by
Mrs. Ceausescu, who by most evidence is the most unpopular member
of the leadership, has been a political liability for her husband.4 Evi-
dently her appointment on March 10 to head a “National Committee
of Assistance” to coordinate internal and foreign donations was not
well received. Nothing further has been heard about the committee or
about Mrs. Ceausescu’s role in earthquake assistance.
Popular Discontent in Post-Earthquake Period
Ceausescu’s political exploitation of the catastrophe clearly alien-
ated the Romanian elite. For the average Romanian, however, political
issues remain secondary to pocketbook issues, and in the aftermath of
the earthquake the latter took on added significance and sensitivity.
Any hopes the public may have had that the trauma would prompt
a fundamental reevaluation of economic priorities were disabused
within a few days. Even before the full extent of economic loss could
be assessed, Ceausescu emphasized that the five-year plan targets
would have to be met “in accordance with the initial provisions.”
Subsequently, however, the need to give a psychological boost to a
weary and disillusioned population was recognized, and in May the
regime announced a program of wage and pension increases designed
to put more money in consumers’ pockets. The program as a whole
has nonetheless been greeted with skepticism because of uncertainty
4 An unflattering portrayal of a character thought to represent Elena in a 1971 novel
by Paul Goma caused the book’s rejection and completed Goma’s alienation from the
regime. Ceausescu’s three children—Valentin, Zoe, and Nicu are—less prominent, and
therefore less unpopular than Elena, but their personalities and penchant for high living
are further liabilities for Ceausescu. [Footnote is in the original.]

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
over the extent of real gain for the consumer. More seriously, the
proposed pension law changes, while increasing pension payments,
contained provisions adversely affecting certain categories of pen-
sion recipients.
In early August, Ceausescu was forced to interrupt a vacation to
rush to the scene of a strike by coal miners angered by provisions of
the new pension law. Reportedly, Ceausescu, who was greeted with
open hostility by the miners, agreed to change some of its more onerous
provisions, and the strike ended.
The August strike was the second overt expression of popular
discontent since the earthquake. On June 13 a mass riot at Bucharest
stadium, triggered by public anger at the overselling of tickets to a
pop concert and soccer match, had taken on a clearly anti-regime cast.
These two unrelated incidents indicate that popular frustration has
reached the point where traditional Romanian passivity toward politi-
cal authority can no longer be taken for granted.
Conclusion
After 12 years of rule, Ceausescu’s élan appears undiminished. His
handling of the earthquake crisis and its aftermath demonstrated anew
the qualities of decisiveness, energy, and tactical skill which have long
been hallmarks of his style. The initial period of confusion was very
brief, and while some have questioned the emphasis placed on cosmetic
aspects of the relief program, there is no denying the impressive
results achieved.
Offsetting
these
accomplishments
was
Ceausescu’s
seeming
unwillingness or inability to modify characteristics of his rule which
threaten further erosion of his support within the party and among
broad strata of the population.
—The increasingly blatant cult of personality is viewed with cyni-
cism or embarrassment by many Romanians.
—Mistrust permeates the top ranks of the country leadership, while
the circle of Ceausescu supporters constantly narrows.
—Rigid adherence to unpopular economic policies, aggravated by
ineptness in their implementation, continues.
As yet, there is no immediate, visible threat to Ceausescu’s over-
whelming dominance of the levers of power. His skill in maneuvering
potential critics out of positions of influence appears to have prevented
formation of alternative leadership clusters. A new confrontation with
the Soviets, should one occur, could once again permit him to rally
Romanians behind the banner of nationalism.
Over the longer term, however, Ceausescu’s failure to reverse what
looks like a gradual but steady erosion in his political backing could
increasingly isolate him, making effective policy formulation and exe-

Romania
cution more and more difficult and threatening the stability of his
regime.
183.
Editorial Note
On August 25, 1977, Israeli Prime Minister Menachem Begin visited
Bucharest for discussions with Romanian President Nicolae Ceausescu.
The Embassy in Bucharest reported in telegram 6444, September 1, that
while the Romanian media had been “singularly uninformative on
substance of talks,” according to the Israeli Ambassador to Romania,
the two leaders had begun “getting through to each other if only in
terms of personal rapport” despite serious disagreements between
them on the Middle East issue. “Each side restated its well-known
positions” the Embassy reported, and, although “no offer was made
by Ceausescu to mediate nor was he so asked by Begin,” the two
sides agreed to stay in touch with one another on the issue. (National
Telegram 6719 from Tel Aviv, September 8, provided further details
on the Ceausescu-Begin meeting reported from Bucharest. In his con-
versation with U.S. Ambassador to Israel Samuel Lewis and the Deputy
Chief of Mission following his return from Romania, Prime Minister
Begin recounted that Ceausescu “claimed [Egyptian President Anwar
al-] Sadat told him earlier this year that he is ready for a direct meeting
between representatives of Egypt and Israel. Begin asked if Sadat meant
he was ready to meet with him (Begin). If so, Begin said he was pre-
pared. Ceausescu thought a meeting at such a high level was not yet
in the cards, but that the initial contact would have to be between
‘representatives’ of the two countries at a lower, unspecified level.
When Ambassador asked whether Begin understood that ‘ball
remained in the Romanian court’ to arrange meeting, response was
that it remained in the Egyptian court.” (National Archives, RG 59,
Central Foreign Policy File, D770325–0731)
Talk of a Romanian mediation effort in the Middle East was not
without basis. Bucharest was the only Eastern European Communist
country to maintain diplomatic relations with Israel following the 1967
War, despite pressure from Moscow and the Arab countries to isolate
Israel. Bucharest had also been involved in back-channel diplomacy in
1967, Document 411) and in the initial stages of the Sino-American

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
volume XXIX, Eastern Europe; Eastern Mediterranean, 1969–1972, Doc-
184.
Memorandum of Conversation1
SUBJECT
Middle East
PARTICIPANTS
U.S.
Secretary Vance
Deputy Assistant Secretary William Luers
Ints M. Silins, EUR/EE (Notetaker)
Romania
Ambassador Nicolae Nicolae
Third Secretary Petre Anghel (Interpreter)
SUMMARY: Romanian Ambassador Nicholae briefed the Secretary
on Prime Minister Begin’s talks with President Ceausescu in Romania
August 25–29. The Romanian account of these meetings shows that
Romania pressed Begin to adopt a more reasonable position on solu-
tions in the Middle East; the Romanian position has similarities to our
own. The Romanians believe the Israelis may eventually show some
flexibility but have no particular evidence for this conclusion. The
Secretary said we will keep in touch with the Government of Romania
on Middle East Issues and would welcome any suggestions on
approaches to a peaceful settlement. END SUMMARY
Ambassador Nicolae called, on instructions, on Secretary Vance to
present a detailed report on Israeli Prime Minister Begin’s visit to
Bucharest during August 25–29. Ambassador Nicolae read his account
from a written report, which he said was based on a stenographic
record of conversations between Prime Minister Begin and President
Ceausescu.
Drafted by Silins; cleared by Glaspie; approved in S/S on September 21. The meeting
took place in the Secretary’s office.

Romania
1. The Romanian Position
Ceausescu had presented the Romanian position on conditions
necessary for a just and lasting peace in the Middle East. These include:
(a) Israel’s withdrawal from the occupied territories; (b) recognition of
the legitimate interests and aspirations of the Palestinians, including
the right to create an independent state; (c) assurance of the independ-
ence and integrity of all states in the region. Ceausescu had expressed
concern with some Israeli actions; namely, illegal settlements in the
occupied territories, and Israeli involvement in Lebanon. Ceausescu
said that Israel must revise its position and recognize the national rights
of the Palestinian people, lacking which, no lasting solution is possible.
He said that it is necessary to break the vicious circle around relations
with the PLO by a clear statement of the right of self-determination of
the Palestinian people. He added that the establishment of a Palestinian
state will not satisfy all Palestinian demands; there is also the problem
of compensation for losses suffered by Arabs who were resettled in
other countries.
Ceausescu said that no one can imagine a solution in the Middle
East without participation by the PLO at Geneva on an equal footing
and with full rights. He said that conditions are now most favorable
for progress toward peace, and he particularly emphasized that respon-
sibility rests with Prime Minister Begin and with Israel for not taking
advantage of these favorable conditions. Ceausescu noted that Israel
hangs on to old and rigid positions, and it is a grave mistake not to
meet the flexible positions of the Arab states. Ceausescu said the situa-
tion may change at any time with grave consequences for peace.
Ceausescu pointed out that the framework offered by the UN
cannot be ignored. Israel has to recognize the UN role, including that
of the Committee on Special Rights of the Palestinian People.
Ceausescu noted that Romania does not want to assume the role
of mediator but seeks to make its contribution to peace in the Middle
East along with other states.
2. Begin’s Position
Prime Minister Begin repeatedly underlined that it is his desire
and that of Israel to achieve peace and avoid another war in the Middle
East—this is the sole motive for his actions. There are no preconditions
for a reconvened Geneva Conference, and all problems should be sub-
ject to negotiations. Begin offered no new ideas on the framework of
the negotiations but explained the content and sense of proposals he
had made during his visit to the United States.
Begin said Israel would not oppose the inclusion of Palestinian
representatives in a Jordanian delegation, if they are not known PLO
members. Begin said that a single Arab delegation would not be justi-
fied since peace treaties must be negotiated and signed separately.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
Begin pointed out that the policy of non-recognition and rejection
of the PLO is motivated by the fact that the Palestinian national charter
calls for the destruction of Israel.
Israel apparently plans an overall settlement through the conclu-
sion of peace treaties. Begin did not mention the possibility of partial
solutions during his meetings with Ceausescu. The essential content
of these peace treaties, according to Begin, should be cessation of the
state of war. Begin said that territorial problems and settlements in the
occupied territories should not be obstacles to peace, everything being
negotiable. Begin said the Israeli position on the delimitation of frontiers
is dictated entirely by national security reasons and is not a pretext
for territorial aggrandizement. The final borders are to be jointly estab-
lished only through negotiations and reflected in the peace treaties.
The establishment of diplomatic and other relations must be an integral
part of the peace treaties—but this is a problem for the negotiations,
not a precondition.
Begin attached great importance to the contacts at Foreign Minister
level at the UN this fall. Israel would have preferred direct contacts,
but in any case some progress can be made toward a conference.
With regard to the problem in southern Lebanon, Begin said he
does not want any Lebanese territory and would do anything to avoid
the outbreak of another war, but Israel cannot be indifferent to the fate
of the Christian minority in the region.
3. Romanian Conclusions
The Romanian Government considers that Prime Minister Begin’s
visit was a good opportunity to set forth the Romanian position toward
establishment of peace in the Middle East. Efforts should be intensified
to convince Israel to revise its rigid position. During the talks, the
Romanian side got the impression that, despite Begin’s rigid statements,
the Israeli Government might be considering the possibility of revising
its positions. Begin did not reject the possibility of a peaceful solution
to the Palestinian question, but said that it would be hard to do this
as long as the PLO does not renounce the idea of destroying Israel.
Begin said that he would think over the comments and analysis made
by President Ceausescu.
If only for this reason, the Romanians consider the visit useful. It
was never expected that Begin would revise his positions in Bucharest
or find the solution to the Middle East problem while there. The opinion
of the Romanian Government is that Begin’s intransigent statements
do not represent the final word. The possibility of an understanding
is not closed, but it is necessary for all countries to help bring the
respective positions closer together so that the Geneva Conference can
reconvene and a solution be found for PLO participation.

Romania
Ambassador Nicolae conveyed President Ceausescu’s thanks for
the briefing he had received on the Secretary’s Middle East visit,2 and
he conveyed the hope that exchanges will continue, including a meeting
between Secretary Vance and Romanian Foreign Minister Macovescu
at the UN.
Secretary Vance expressed his great appreciation for the report on
Prime Minister Begin’s visit. He said it was useful that such a conversa-
tion took place and that it was good for Begin to hear as many views
as possible. The Secretary said there are many similarities between the
US and Romanian positions on what is required for a settlement in the
Middle East. The statements made by Prime Minister Begin in Romania
are in line with what he said to us here. There are two crucial issues,
however, on which we see no flexibility on the Israeli side: the West
Bank and the question of a Palestinian entity or state. We agree there
must be some Palestinian participation at Geneva; otherwise, there
can be no lasting settlement. It is, therefore, both a procedural and a
substantive question. We hope that at the UNGA we can help move
the positions closer together and bring about a Geneva meeting no
later than December.
The Secretary said that we look forward to keeping in touch with
the Romanian Government on the Middle East and would appreciate
any suggestions Romania might offer. The parties to the conference
will have to make the final determination themselves, but they will
need help.
Vance’s summary of his trip to the Middle East to be used in a briefing for Ceausescu.
the Embassy in Bucharest briefed Ceausescu on the trip was found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
185.
Telegram From the Embassy in Romania to the Department
of State1
7631. Subj: GOR’s Campaign for Multi-Year MFN. Ref: Bucharest
1. Summary: During Counselor Nimetz’s visit in Romania, he met
with three high-level GOR officials who, each in his fashion, issued a
clear signal that the Romanians intend to launch a full-blown campaign
for the eventual achievement of multi-year Most Favored Nation treat-
ment. President Ceausescu has clearly put this issue at the head of his
list of priorities in terms of US–GOR economic relations. The point
man in this campaign will be Deputy Prime Minister Patan who is
scheduled to visit Washington, October 27–November 3. The culmina-
tion of this phase of the campaign would logically occur with the
Ceausescu visit. Meanwhile we need to think out how best to achieve
our own interests. End of summary.
2. The Government of Romania’s serious intent to attempt to
achieve the extension of Most Favored Nation treatment for longer
than one year at a time was clearly and repeatedly expressed in conver-
sations held with Counselor Nimetz in the course of his visit to Roma-
nia, October 10–12. Foreign Minister Macovescu said that it was politi-
cally important to avoid an annual debate in Congress which tends to
be treated as an open invitation for a debate focusing on any topic
whether or not it has any direct bearing on US–GOR economic relations.
He said that if it appears now to be politically impractical or unwise
to attempt to separate out the Romanian case from the 1974 Trade
Act, some provision should be found which would permit that the
congressional review take place only every three years. Noting that
the Foreign Minister was even more familiar with the MFN issue than
he was, the Counselor pointed out that emigration performance was
bound to be important, especially in coming months, as we assess it
on a bi-annual basis. Anything GOR could do to make this performance
Confidential. Also sent to Budapest.
ber 14 conversation between Barnes and Patan. Despite understanding the challenges
multi-year MFN for Romania would have to overcome, Patan made clear “GOR will
persist in discussing here and in D.C. the desirability of multi-year review and continue
to explore modalities, direct and indirect, for attaining their objective.” (National

Romania
attractive, especially with regard to emigration to Israel, would be
helpful.3
3. RCP CC Secretary for International Affairs Stefan Andrei noted
October 10 that U.S. was surely aware both of Rom desire for more
ample relations and of President Ceausescu’s desire to get away from
the annual review of the MFN clause; the President’s argument that
we need a more stable basis for the whole relationship strengthened
this desire, Andrei said. Counselor replied that it is difficult to be
optimistic about short-term prospects. Multi-year review would be a
serious matter in the Congress, as most recent annual extension had not
been, and it would be necessary to lay the groundwork very carefully.
Acceleration of the process of good relations between the two countries
and a demonstration to our public that progress on human rights is
possible here would be the kinds of developments needed. It is impor-
tant to continue to consult on these matters.4
4. In Nimetz’s meeting with Deputy Prime Minister Patan on Octo-
ber 11, Patan stressed the peculiarity of the Romanian fate, pointing
out that it was the single country which had concluded an arrangement
under the provisions of the Trade Act of 1974 for Most Favored Nation
treatment. By doing so, Romania had set a sort of example for those
states which were and remain highly skeptical that any satisfactory
accommodation on this issue can be reached with the United States.
Patan stressed that the example set by the GOR should be a more
positive model. There are diplomatic representatives in Bucharest, who,
having advised against the GOR entering into the agreement with the
USG concerning MFN, are now saying, quote, I told you so, end quote.
5. In October 12 meeting, FornMin Macovescu was somewhat less
elliptical in comments on annual review process.5 As Foreign Minister
he wished to give the political viewpoint, he said: It is important from
all points of view to avoid the kinds of things that happen during the
discussions of bilateral issues with Gliga and Macovescu, including the proposed Ceau-
sescu visit to Washington, other high-level exchanges, arms control, and scientific and
told Nimetz that Communist parties in the West are in the process of establishing an
independent line, with the strongest parties having a special role. (National Archives,
5 Nimetz also discussed international issues with Macovescu during their meeting.
In telegram 7602 from Bucharest, October 14, the Embassy reported Macovescu’s assertion
to Nimetz that the joint U.S.-Soviet declaration preoccupied Romania, and that Bucharest
was wary of any agreements between the superpowers which might infringe on its
telegram 7655 from Bucharest, the Embassy reported Macovescu’s summary to Nimetz
of the Romanian position on the Middle East and his conversations with Israeli Foreign

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
annual renewal. If discussion were normal, on the substance of U.S.-
Romanian economic relations, this would be fine, but what is actually
discussed is neither to Romania’s advantage nor to that of the U.S.
Romania is not afraid to confront serious issues but needs to know
what it is doing so far. On Transylvania, quote, we know whom we
should discuss it with, end quote, and have all sorts of arguments at
our disposal, but the U.S. Congress is not the place to talk about rights
or non-rights in Transylvania. Both the U.S. and Romania can live
without such discussion and, after all, we entered into the trade agree-
ment from other motives.6
6. Counselor responded that U.S. citizens are free to raise any topic
which interests them in such congressional hearings, but that what
Macovescu had called the Transylvanian problem is not a problem for
us; it is a Romanian domestic affair. Like Mexican-Americans and
other Americans of foreign descent, Americans of Hungarian descent
sometimes like to consider the cultural affairs of their country of origin
their own, but we do not consider that this has political significance.
During the last renewal period there were not many questions on the
topic in the Congress. From time to time members of Congress are
given papers and speeches to read, but these should not be overrated;
at times we have the impression that only the GOR reads them. Cultural
diversity in the sense defined by the Helsinki Final Act is a valid topic
of discourse, but this is a very general proposition. Using the example
of putting Spanish on the ballot and in the schools of New York City,
Counselor noted that Americans are used to discussing these issues
and expressed view that Hungarian-American thinking should not be
considered at any other level.
7. Macovescu concluded discussion by noting that Romania has a
public opinion, too, and while it may not be as “tough” as ours, GOR
officials can still be asked uncomfortable questions—such as what pos-
sible link there is between Transylvania and a trade agreement—in
Parliament. Transylvania is not a problem for Romania, but it may be
a problem in bilateral relations; it would be wrong to ignore issues
which seem small today but which may be important tomorrow, “in
both directions.”
8. Counselor indicated in his conversations that these issues would
continue to be studied in Washington, and GOR interlocutors expressed
6 In his September 29 meeting with Vance in New York at the UNGA, reported to
Bucharest in telegram 238769, October 4, Macovescu had made a similar pitch. The
Romanian Foreign Minister pressed for de-coupling issues such as human rights and
emigration from the review of “a trade agreement.” Vance suggested that multi-year
review could be discussed, but that too would require legislation. (National Archives,

Romania
appreciation for his willingness to listen and for frank responses, show-
ing that he was thinking seriously about the problem.
9. Comment: Romanians clearly saw Counselor’s visit as Bucharest
opener for process leading up to Ceausescu’s visit in the spring, and
Patan’s upcoming trip will be opener in U.S. just as clearly, multi-year
MFN review will be the repeat the central issue in preparing successful
Presidential visit. Macovescu’s frank references to Transylvania also
suggest political context in which Romanians see these matters, and
Department may wish to consider next steps in U.S.-Hungarian
relations in this context as well as broader Soviet-EE framework.
10. As Ambassador discussed with Counselor, we feel it important
to keep bearing in mind our own interests—both political and commer-
cial—in achieving a more solid long term relationship with Romania.
Patan’s visit should be used to further the process of helping GOR to
understand the context in which multi-year MFN might become possi-
ble. In fact the pre-Ceausescu visit period needs to be thought of in
terms of how we can best make use of the Romanian push for a revised
MFN status.
Barnes
186.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, November 15, 1977
SUBJECT
A Presidential Letter for Romanian President Ceausescu
Ambassador Rudolph Aggrey, the new US envoy to Romania, will
be leaving shortly to take up his post in Bucharest. I think it would be
appropriate when he presents his credentials also to deliver a letter
from you to Romanian President Nicolae Ceausescu.2
Correspondence with Foreign Leaders File, Box 16, Romania: President Nicolae Ceau-
2 Aggrey suggested the letter during a meeting on November 11 with Aaron. King
edited a Department of State version and forwarded it to Brzezinski on November 14.
Aaron wrote on King’s memorandum to Brzezinski: “ZB—I think this is worth doing
so that we have our channel.” Brzezinski approved the recommendation. (Ibid.)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
Ambassador Aggrey is replacing Harry Barnes, who has been a
particularly effective envoy and has established excellent contacts with
Romanians at all levels. There have been intelligence reports that at
least some high level Romanian officials interpret Aggrey’s assignment
to Bucharest as a sign of declining American interest in Romania. Using
Aggrey as the channel to deliver a Presidential letter will both reaffirm
interest in Romania and underline your confidence in him.
At the present time, it is important that we make gestures to the
Romanians to reaffirm our interest in their foreign policy.3 Although
much could be done to improve its internal policy, Romania is still the
Warsaw Pact state which shows the greatest foreign policy autonomy
from the Soviet Union. We are in the process of reaffirming our interest
in Poland (through your visit) and Hungary (through returning the
Crown and then negotiating a trade agreement), but the only sign of
our interest in Romania is a visit to Washington by Ceausescu next
spring for which we are still not able to give the Romanians a date
despite their frequently expressed wishes to fix a firm time.
Shortly after your inauguration, President Ceausescu sent a special
envoy with a personal letter for you expressing the desire to maintain
good relations. It would be useful and appropriate for us to send him
a message on this occasion.
RECOMMENDATION
That you sign the letter to President Ceausescu at Tab A.4
3 On October 17, King sent a memorandum to Brzezinski recommending a brief
meeting between Carter and Patan, who was to travel to Washington for the Joint U.S.-
Romanian Economic Commission November 1–3. King wrote: “A Presidential meeting
with Patan would be an important political gesture at present. Our latest actions have
probably raised doubts in suspicious Romanian minds about our interest and concern
with their affairs,” pointing to the upcoming visit by Carter to Poland and the return
of the Crown of St. Stephen to Hungary. Recommending disapproval, Aaron wrote
“ZB—I disagree. This is not worth the President’s time at this stage.” Disapproving the
recommendation, Brzezinski highlighted Patan’s position as Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister of Foreign Trade and wrote in the margin “The P. is not an Asst. Sec. of State!”
(Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 66,
minutes and was briefly received by the President. (Carter Library, National Security
Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Country Chron File, Box 45, Roma-
nia: 1977)
4 Carter approved the recommendation and, after revising the text, signed the letter
on November 15. Several drafts, including one with Carter’s revisions, are attached but
not printed.

Romania
187.
Memorandum of Conversation1
SUBJECT
Summary of the President’s Meeting with the Romanian Foreign Minister
PARTICIPANTS
The President
The Vice President
Mr. Philip Habib, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
Mr. William B. Quandt, NSC Staff
The Honorable George Macovescu, Foreign Minister of Romania
His Excellency Nicolae M. Nicolae, Ambassador from Romania
Foreign Minister: President Ceausescu sends his best regards.
President Carter: I am very proud of our friendship with him.
Foreign Minister: I have a message for you from my President. (The
Foreign Minister hands the President a letter.)2
President Carter: It’s a pleasure to have you here. You have made
a long trip. We are looking forward to next spring when we hope to
have President Ceausescu with us.
Dr. Brzezinski: We hope to find a time in the late spring for his visit.
President Carter: It will be a pleasure to have him here. We have a
strong friendship with your country and we are proud of our good
relations.
Foreign Minister: We feel that our relations have developed well,
and President Ceausescu wants to extend this. He considered this to
be a good time to send me here with some ideas on the Middle East,
especially after the visit of President Sadat to Jerusalem. In the last
three months, President Ceausescu has met with Prime Minister Begin
and then with President Sadat. He talked at length with both of them.
You have also talked to them. I would like to tell you about our interest
Office. Brzezinski forwarded a copy of the memorandum to Vance on November 28. A
summary of the meeting was also transmitted in telegram 283125 to Bucharest, Tel Aviv,
Cairo, and Damascus, November 26. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
File, P840072–0448)
2 Ceausescu sent Carter a letter designating Macovescu as a special envoy on “some
considerations on the situation in the Middle East and on the continued development
of Romanian-American relations.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski
Material, President’s Correspondence with Foreign Leaders File, Box 16, Romania: Presi-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
in the Middle East. We have no special interest, no strategic or economic
interests in the Middle East. We do trade with the Arabs and with
Israel but we have no special interests. Our main interest is in peace.
We consider our security to be in danger if peace is not reached. We
want peace and understanding in the Middle East and we are working
hard for it but we are not mediators in the Middle East. We try to
provide an open channel for the two parties to use, so that they can
transmit ideas, can see each other’s point of view, and we sometimes
add our own, but we are not mediators.
President Ceausescu saw both Begin and Sadat, and now they have
met each other.3 Our estimation is that this is an important step for
peace and for understanding, but I have travelled many times between
Jerusalem and Cairo and I know how deep the lack of confidence
between the parties is. Now a first step has been taken toward building
some confidence and we think it is a good step. The next main step is
to go and convene the Geneva Conference, but the parties needed to
help prepare it directly, and we think that has been done. There are
now some differences in the Arab world.
President Carter: I’ve noticed!
Foreign Minister: We see a dramatic situation, and my President
believes it is the right time to help Sadat. Sadat has support at home
and support from Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Sudan, Morocco, Jordan, and
Tunisia. In fact, this represents a majority of the Arabs. Against him
is Assad, and some others like Algeria and the PLO.
I can say that President Ceausescu has sent a message through an
emissary to President Assad and to Arafat. He sent Mr. Poungan, but
we have no news yet of his meetings. If we receive news, we will tell
you.4 Our interest is to try to calm the situation. We understand the
Syrian and PLO position but we want them to calm down. Now is the
right moment to go for peace. If we lose time, there will be dangers.
President Anwar Sadat. In telegram 8153 from Cairo, May 13, the Embassy reported
that the primary purpose of the Ceausescu visit seemed to be bilateral and economic
issues, and that there was little evidence that Ceausescu was carrying any special message
from either the Soviets or the Israelis. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
conversation with Andrei. Andrei informed Aggrey that Ceausescu had decided to send
Pungan to Cairo and Jerusalem, and that asked Vance meet with Pungan confidentially
in either one of the two cities. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
in either city would be impossible and that he would prefer not to meet during the trip,
but rather brief the Romanian Ambassador in Washington upon his return. (National
January 24 in Washington. See Document 190.

Romania
President Carter: President Ceausescu has played a constructive role
in getting the meeting started. This shows the confidence that the two
parties have in your Presidents. I thought that President Sadat and
Prime Minister Begin would get along well, and that seems to have
been true.
I have been disappointed by the negative attitude of President
Assad. We have tried to encourage Assad to be moderate. He personally
has refrained from attacking Sadat, but his government has been very
negative. He had some news this morning that Sadat has asked the
PLO to leave Egypt. Your officials have relations with Arafat and we
do not. Arafat has also been reticent to attack Sadat, but others have
been very critical. I agree with you and President Ceausescu that the
time has come to move toward a comprehensive peace. We are pleased
with Jordan’s statement and if Syria were more positive, Jordan would
be able to go further. The Lebanese attitude also depends on Syria.
What do you suggest doing next?
Foreign Minister: My President has some suggestions. He thinks
that it is important to try to convince Begin to respond to Sadat with
flexibility. Sadat has played his big card. This is the right time for
Israel, with your help, to take steps to show flexibility and to move on
to the Geneva Conference. We have to go to Geneva in the near future.
We can’t lose momentum. Secondly, my President felt that it would
be a good idea to send Vice President Mondale or Mr. Vance to Egypt
to talk to Sadat and then to travel in the area to show your continued
interest in the region. Third, my President feels that the time has come
for you to talk to the PLO. Even Mr. Begin does not reject this idea.
President Carter: Perhaps you already know that we have a public
agreement that was signed between Mr. Ford and the Israeli Govern-
ment, and was reaffirmed by me that states that we will not meet with
the PLO unless the PLO abandons its insistence on the destruction of
Israel. We have asked Arafat to accept Resolution 242, and he can add
a statement of his concern that the Palestinian question is not included
in 242, because 242 only talks of refugees, and then we would be glad
to meet directly. But I can’t break a promise as long as the PLO calls
for Israel’s destruction.
Foreign Minister: I understand. But even Sadat used to say No for
a long time and now he has gone to Jerusalem. We need more flexibility.
You should tell the Israelis that you want some contacts and then the
PLO will become more flexible. We know them well and they are in
difficult positions. They don’t know how to react. It is also time for you
to discuss with the Soviets how to reconvene the Geneva Conference
as co-chairmen. We might send an invitation to the parties or do this
through the United Nations. We think it is best to talk to the Soviets
and to keep them in a positive frame of mind.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
President: We are in close touch with the Soviets. I think that there
are two or three people now, President Assad and President Brezhnev.
We are ready to move rapidly through the UN to call for the Geneva
Conference. We can do this once we have an agreement with the Soviets
on the format, and indications from Assad that he will attend. I would
be reluctant to exclude Syria if they want to cooperate. In a few days,
we will have information from the Israelis and the Egyptians. Then
we can judge our role. I have talked to Prime Minister Begin, but I
have not yet heard from President Sadat. They were both tired after
the visit. President Ceausescu could help with President Assad. After
your emissary has met with Assad, we would like to know anything
you learn about how we might best approach the Syrians. I have been
pleased with the Soviet attitude as expressed in the joint statement.
They could, of course, obstruct a Geneva Conference but we see no
evidence that that is their intention. They have played a constructive
role as compared to the past and are now eager to move to overcome
the problem we have with Syria.
Foreign Minister: Concerning the substance of my trip, my President
was very happy that you would agree to see me. The main point is to
make clear that we need to help President Sadat. If he falls or if he is
isolated, there can be no peace in the Middle East. His trip to Jerusalem
was an important step.
President Carter: What is your relationship to Saudi Arabia?
Foreign Minister: We have had none. We see each other sometimes
and talk, but we have no diplomatic relations. They are not prepared
for them.
President Carter: We have had good cooperation from the Saudis.
They help Egypt, and we don’t want to see that disrupted. Most of the
world admires Sadat for his move and we hope that the meeting he
had will be a success.
Foreign Minister: He sees himself as a strong leader who can afford
to make this kind of move.
President: He is a strong leader and he has proved it. I am glad to
see that you are taking constructive steps and that they are fully in
line with our own. I hope that we will keep exchanging views.
Foreign Minister: This has been our first mission since the Sadat trip.
Dr. Brzezinski: Has Mr. Poungan gone to see Arafat?
Foreign Minister: Yes, he left two days ago.
President Carter: We look forward to hearing the report. We have
good relations with Assad and I like him. I think he is a fine man.
Foreign Minister: Our direct bilateral relationships are good and
President Ceausescu looks forward to his visit here.
President: I look forward to meeting him.

Romania
Foreign Minister: If the Vice President could come to Romania, or
Secretary Vance before Ceausescu’s visit, it would be very good. It
should not be linked to a visit to the Middle East.
President: The Vice President does not need much encouragement
to travel.
Vice President Mondale: I went to Romania in 1968, and I met the
Foreign Minister at that time and we had a good talk.
President Carter: It is hard to keep him here.
Vice President: I’ll become an expert on Romania.
Foreign Minister: It would be good to have you in our country.
188.
Memorandum of Conversation1
SUBJECT
Meeting with Foreign Minister
PARTICIPANTS
US
The Secretary
Philip Habib Under Secretary for Political Affairs
Alfred Atherton, NEA Assistant Secretary
William Luers, EUR Deputy Assistant Secretary (notetaker)
ROMANIA
Foreign Minister George Macovescu
Ambassador Nicolae Nicolae
Summary of Actions
The Secretary told Macovescu he would work on setting a date for
the Ceausescu visit and report back to the Foreign Minister soon.
The Secretary asked that the Romanians keep us up-to-date on the
PLO thinking over the next few weeks.
Macovescu renewed his invitation to the Secretary and to Mr. Habib
to visit Romania. No commitments made on these.
Luers; approved in S/S on November 30. The meeting took place in the Secretary’s office.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
Middle East
Foreign Minister Macovescu said he had promised the President he
would provide us news from the report of one of Romania’s officials
(Pungan) who had visited Damascus.2 The report is that President
Assad intends to keep to his stand on the Sadat visit. The Syrians are
making an analysis to determine the consequences of the visit and
cannot say exactly what the outcome will be. Assad is still in favor of
the Geneva conference and believes this is the way to have a global
solution in the Middle East but he is preoccupied that the way Sadat
is moving will not lead to Geneva. He is worried about a separate
agreement.
The Foreign Minister, in referring to the PLO, said that Arafat is
still angry. He has learned that the PLO Central Committee decided
to attack Sadat but keep the criticism within certain limits. The Secretary
asked whether the Romanians have specific knowledge that the criti-
cism was to be within certain limits or is that just the Romanian impres-
sion from observations. Macovescu confirmed that the Romanians have
knowledge that the PLO Central Committee agreed to establish certain
limits on the criticism. The Secretary then said he had heard from UN
Secretary General Waldheim that the PLO in the UN had in the last
48 hours played down the attacks on Sadat. The Foreign Minister said
his Ambassador at the UN had given him similar reports but also that
the PLO representatives at the UN were expressing disturbance about
being possibly left out of a Geneva conference.
The Secretary asked whether the PLO said how they planned to
proceed from now on with regard to the Sadat visit. Minister Macovescu
said no. Mr. Habib asked whether the Romanians sense any change in
the PLO position as to whether they must be invited as the PLO to a
conference. Macovescu replied that he had no recent word from Damas-
cus or Beirut but the PLO representative in New York had said several
weeks ago that the PLO would not reject the idea of going to Geneva
as part of an Arab delegation.
The Secretary asked what the PLO reaction has been to the Iraqis and
Libyans and how recent events have affected those relations. Minister
Macovescu said he had no reading on that subject. The Secretary said
that the US Ambassador will talk to the Syrians in Damascus today to
get their view on how they see the situation developing.
Macovescu said, in summation, that the Syrians and the PLO expect
to have a conference on the Middle East in the near future and they
fear a separate settlement. They even think that the US may be behind
the development of a separate settlement between Israel and Egypt.
2 See Document 187.

Romania
Mr. Habib said that had the PLO and the Syrians accepted the earlier
proposals of the US we and they would be in Geneva by now. Macovescu
replied that the Syrians and Palestinians are now analyzing that situa-
tion. Mr. Habib suggested that the Romanians could be helpful in influ-
encing that analysis. Macovescu then reiterated what he had told Presi-
dent Carter that since the PLO and the Syrians want a conference that
US should press the Israelis for some concessions to Sadat to bring the
conference about.
The Secretary said that it is our view that we should continue to
strive for a Geneva conference and discourage separate agreements.
This Administration has stood for a comprehensive negotiated settle-
ment and continues to do so, realizing that within a comprehensive
settlement separate peace arrangements would be possible. The Secre-
tary said that it is difficult now to determine how this new element
(the Sadat visit to Israel) will affect the timing of the preparations. The
Secretary said that he is strongly in favor of having such a conference
well prepared in advance.
Macovescu replied that he was very glad to hear that the US still
favors a Geneva conference and a comprehensive settlement; that there
are rumors that the US was behind the Egyptian-Israeli meeting and
that the US supported separate settlements. The Secretary replied force-
fully that the US for years has been saying that we wanted the parties
to the dispute to talk to each other. Naturally we feel that the Sadat
visit to Jerusalem was a major step in this direction which we fully
favor. But this does not change our position that we favor a Geneva
conference which will deal with the matter comprehensively. The Secre-
tary asked that the Romanians do what they could to kill the rumors
to the contrary.
Reception of Ambassador Aggrey
The Secretary thanked the Foreign Minister for the warmth of the
reception given to Ambassador Aggrey in Bucharest and the speed
with which his credentials were accepted. Macovescu thanked the Secre-
tary for the message conveyed by Ambassador Aggrey and made some
general remarks about disarmament issues and the fact that the Bel-
grade conference is now into its second phase. He said “the show is
now over” as they move to work on new proposals and to drafting
the final communique at Belgrade.
Human Rights—Goma
The Secretary said he would like to raise a delicate matter. He asked
what the facts were behind this mornings press reports of the remarks
of Romanian writer (Paul) Goma (who had recently left Romania).
Macovescu replied that he had known about this in advance. The
Foreign Ministry had learned of the PEN Club invitation to Goma and

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
it was finally agreed that he should be given a visa to travel abroad
for one year. The Foreign Minister said he guessed that Goma would
“speak up” once he departed. He said, “We are not scared. One person
cannot hurt us.”
The Secretary then asked about the facts of the case as Goma alleged
them in his press conference.3 Macovescu said that it is difficult to say.
He, Macovescu, does not know all the facts of the case but the Secretary
should understand that Goma is not a big writer in Romania and he
is a liar. Macovescu does not believe Goma. “It is not a problem for
us.” Macovescu said that we can talk together in general about improv-
ing human rights in Romania and improving the general situation to
provide better conditions for the Romanian people but let’s speak
frankly, “We cannot make a problem of Mr. Goma.” The Secretary did
not reply to this last remark of the Minister.
Middle East
The Secretary said he would like to return to a discussion of the
Middle East. He asked whether Romania would continue to be in touch
with the PLO. Macovescu replied they would not be in touch on a
continuing basis but would do so whenever the need arose. The Secre-
tary said that from our standpoint, we would like an updated reading
of PLO views as the situation develops over the coming weeks.
Macovescu said he would take these US interests into account. He then
reiterated that action from the US side would be helpful in determining
events. He said that the Americans are a courageous people and should
be capable of turning policies around and moving toward a real Middle
East settlement.
The Secretary asked whether the Romanians had any discussion
about the expulsion of the PLO from Cairo. Macovescu said that they
had no discussion on the subject but that they know the PLO representa-
tives who were allegedly expelled are still in Cairo. Macovescu said
that he knows that the relations between Arafat and Sadat were and
still are good and he does not believe that these relations have signifi-
cantly changed.
The Secretary asked how Arafat’s relations were with the rest of
the PLO, particularly with regard to the rejectionist element. Macovescu
3 Romanian dissident writer Paul Goma departed Romania in November 1977 for
France on a one-year tourist visa. Once in Paris, Goma held a press conference accusing
the Romanian Government of inhumane treatment of dissidents, of firing over 4,000
miners as a result of the 1977 unrest in Valea Jiului, and alleging that the Romanian
secret police had threatened him. He suggested that the assault on Radio Free Europe
Romania desk reporter Monica Lovinescu the previous week by unknown assailants
was a Securitate’s attempt to intimidate him and other dissidents. (“Rumanian Dissident

Romania
replied that he still believed they were “O.K.” and that the left wing
of the PLO headed by Habash is not a real problem. Mr. Habib said
that rejectionist element, not the “left” element, is the most serious
and wondered whether the “rejectionists” influenced Arafat toward
continuing rejection of Israel’s right to exist.
Macovescu said that Arafat will accept the right of Israel to exist.
Date of Ceausescu Visit
The Secretary said we were looking forward to the visit of President
Ceausescu and we will try to have a date very soon. Macovescu replied
that this is very important.4 Ceausescu is planning to go to London
around that period (late spring 1978) and would like to prepare his
schedule. Also, he would like to begin preparations on the substance
of the trip. The Secretary agreed that he would move forward to get a
date very soon.
[Omitted here is discussion of Vance’s visit to Latin America.]
Continuing Contacts
The Secretary thanked the Foreign Minister for coming to Washing-
ton to discuss the Middle East and stressed the importance of maintain-
ing these contacts. The Foreign Minister said that he had discussed this
desirability with Mr. Habib. Mr. Habib replied that the Romanians have
been very kind to keep open their invitation to him to visit Bucharest,
but the Secretary kept him so busy he could not go. Macovescu said
that Mr. Habib was always welcome and he renewed his invitation to
the Secretary to visit whenever he could. The Secretary thanked the
Foreign Minister.
4 In December, the Department of State recommended that some visits by foreign
dignitaries scheduled for the first half of 1978 be rescheduled for the second half of 1978
or early 1979. The memorandum was forwarded to Mondale by Clift on December 13,
with his concurrence. Disagreeing with the recommendation, King wrote “Ceausescu and
the Romanians are going to be very upset over this. He has already been told the first
half of 1978 and proposed April. To put this off is going to cause real problems for us,
since the Romanians are already having doubts about our interest in them. I will do a
more formal protest memo if that is required.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
189.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
Romania1
23063. Subject: Inter-agency Group Meeting on Romania, Jan. 20.
1. Summary. Inter-agency group meeting to begin preparations for
the Ceausescu visit2 was held on January 20, chaired by Nick Andrews
of EUR/EE. Participants included a wide range of Department bureaus
as well as representatives from Commerce, Treasury, USIA, CIA, DOD,
and EXIM-Bank. Discussions dealt with international, economic, politi-
cal, human rights, nuclear and other issues. A communique and other
documents for signing during the visit were considered. End summary.
2. Andrews identified the dual U.S. objectives for Ceausescu’s visit:
to reinforce Romania’s independent foreign policy line and, perhaps
even more important, to get some positive movement in the broad area
of human rights. The important question was to identify specifically
what we want to get from the Romanians. Representatives from S/P
and HA recommended that we seek progress on emigration cases and
other human rights issues before the Ceausescu visit, and then perhaps
include some reference to these concerns in a joint declaration or state-
ment issued during the visit. It was pointed out that it is difficult to
identify at this time specific human rights concerns that the Romanian
authorities can be asked to resolve, since dissident writer Paul Goma
and most others of the “passport-oriented” group of dissidents have
left Romania. Andrews said we will have to identify those human
rights issues which merit the President’s attention and which he should
raise with Ceausescu. In this context, Andrews noted that EUR/EE is
working on a specific human rights action plan for Romania and would
welcome suggestions from HA or other bureaus. The question of what
Confidential. Drafted by Silins and Fromowitz; approved by Andrews.
sation with Macovescu on December 30 and reported growing Romanian concern that
the date of Ceausescu’s visit was not settled. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
reported Ceausescu’s acceptance of the dates and conveyed the Romanian request that
the visit might be announced at an early date. Aggrey suggested that while “timing of
Ceausescu visit to U.S. has been conditioned by timing of that of another Eastern European
visitor”—President Tito visited Washington in March 1978—he hoped that “announce-
ment of Romanian President’s visit could be scheduled or made in such a way as to
avoid obvious link or priority consideration.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
Policy File, D780037–0064)

Romania
incentives the U.S. could offer Romania in seeking improved human
rights performance was also raised, but without conclusive answers.
Multilateral issues. Andrews commented that given Ceausescu’s
interest in international issues, at least one perhaps one-and-a-half of
the two meetings between the two Presidents would be devoted to
such topics as international security issues including SALT, East-West
relations, the Middle East, nonproliferation, and the new international
economic order. The upcoming UN Special Session on Disarmament
(SSOD) was identified as a particularly appropriate topic that the Presi-
dent might raise. President Ceausescu might also be expected to express
an interest in MBFR.
4. Trade agreement renewal/MFN waiver. Andrews said these
issues will be major focus of Romanian concern before and during
visit. There was general agreement that the GOR should be disabused
now of any lingering expectation that a formula for multi-year MFN
can be found in time for the visit (or, for that matter, this year). Reference
was made to Senator Stevenson’s talk with Ceausescu and his blunt
linkage of any revision of Title IV of the Trade Act with progress in
U.S.-Soviet relations.3 Despite such evidence that the GOR at highest
levels should by now have understood the US difficulty with revising
Title IV. It was agreed that Pungan’s VIP visit will provide another
useful opportunity to pour cold water on any Romanian hopes to use
the Ceausescu visit as a vehicle to pry out multi-year MFN. Andrews
also urged all present to make sure that, in conversations with the
Romanian Embassy, they or their principals remain very firm on this
issue. There will also be some GOR targets in economic area (such as
creation of bilateral cooperation projects) for which Romanians will
push, but in which USG cannot play a major role. We will have to
repeat this message at a high level. It was also recognized that since
we have gone about as far as we can in the economic/commercial area
(export controls, MFN, credits, GSP, government support for coopera-
tive ventures), we can expect major problems in fending off the inevita-
ble Romanian requests for much more.
5. On Decree 223, it was suggested that if the renewed assurances
of Romanian action do not translate into settlement offers in a reason-
3 Senator Adlai Stevenson met with President Ceausescu at Ceausescu’s mountain
reported Stevenson’s comment to Ceausescu that the Jackson-Vanik amendment to the
Trade Act was a consequence of U.S.-Soviet relations. The Senator “indicated that relation-
ship of Eastern European countries with Soviet Union continued to appear to be impedi-
ment to the U.S. desire to pursue kind of natural relationships we would like to have
with other Eastern European countries.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
Policy File, D780024–0722)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
able time (once we have presented the cases to Patan), we should warn
the Romanians that we may have to raise this during the visit.
6. World Bank/Human rights. Following a discussion of how we
have so far used this linkage with Romania, it was agreed that any
negative US action before the visit on a World Bank loan for Romania
would antagonize the GOR to such an extent that it would completely
undermine the chances of using Ceausescu’s visit itself to advance our
human rights goals. Nevertheless, we will explore this linkage further
in the context of the human rights action plan currently being revised.
7. Exchanges. It was pointed out that even the exchange program
had a human rights aspect. For example, some American scientific
organizations have complained that travel restrictions prevent Roman-
ian scientists from carrying out their exchange activities. OES recom-
mended that the difficulties with the NSF exchange agreement be raised
with Pungan during his visit to the US in February.
8. Consular. A Circular 175 request is still pending for a dual-
national agreement with Romania. Efforts will be made to complete
this process quickly so that negotiations can begin.
9. Nuclear. It was agreed that it is important to complete action
on the Romanian request to purchase highly-enriched uranium fuel for
their research reactor and the related question of additional assurances
before the April visit. Also pending is the Romanian request to purchase
US heavy water manufacturing technology. In this connection, the
example of Argentina raises some important questions. It was agreed
that an update was needed on the status of Romanian-Canadian negoti-
ations for heavy-water power reactors. Commenting on the possibility
that the Romanians might ask to sign a nuclear cooperation agreement,
OES said that the benefits to the US of such an agreement were not
readily apparent. However, if there were to be a joint declaration or
communique issued during the time of the visit, a reference to the
need for nuclear safeguards and to nonproliferation might be useful.
10. Documents to be signed. Commerce suggested that we exchange
economic information during the Ceausescu visit. The updating the
December 1973 Joint Statement of Presidents Nixon and Ceausescu was
also suggested4 and it was noted that the Romanians can be expected
to want to sign a number of documents during the visit. Andrews
commented that from the US point of view perhaps it would be best
to limit ourselves to simply issuing an unsigned joint communique, in
the event we cannot get the language we want in a statement of princi-
ples or a signed communique.

Romania
11. Action requested: Embassy is requested to provide Department
with best estimate of what will be on Romanian agenda for the Ceau-
sescu visit.5
Christopher
ment’s request with a preliminary list of topics, including the Middle East, China, MFN,
190.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
Romania1
25196. Exdis distribute as Nodis—Cairo pass Atherton. Subject:
Secretary’s Meeting With Romanian Emissary Pungan.
1. Romanian Emissary Pungan met with the Secretary for an hour
on January 24. President Ceausescu had wanted him to pass Romanian
views to the Secretary and to learn what the U.S. thought about the
present Middle East situation. Pungan’s presentation reflected the
Romanian analysis of recent messages to Ceausescu from both Sadat
and Begin, as well as a long meeting which Pungan had with Begin
in Jerusalem on January 22.
2. Pungan said that Ceausescu was deeply engaged in the Middle
East problem, but not of course as a mediator, having strongly sup-
ported the Sadat initiative and having advised both Egypt and Israel
that conditions for a settlement as a result were better than ever. Ceau-
sescu, however, was very concerned over the present situation caused
by the break-off of the Jerusalem Political Committee talks. He felt that
it was essential that channels of communication between Egypt and
Israel remain open. For that reason, he considered it important that
the Security Committee resume meetings right away since, if it did
Exdis. Drafted by Draper; cleared by Andrews and in S; approved by Saunders. Sent
for information Priority to Tel Aviv, Cairo, and Damascus.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
not, it might kill all prospects of resumption of talks in the Political
Committee framework.
3. Pungan reiterated throughout this conversation—as he said he
did to Begin—the Romanian view that there were “circles” hoping for
a failure of the Israeli-Egyptian negotiations, including the Soviets. It
was important, therefore, that Romania and others wanting progress
in the present negotiations do their best to get them going again.
4. Turning to the Sinai aspect of the negotiations, Pungan said that
Romania had advised both parties to find a formula for using the
air fields in common for civilian purposes including tourism, while
preserving Egyptian sovereignty over the area. The Sinai settlements
problem was far more difficult. Romania had judged that Egypt would
do virtually anything, but would never accept any derogation from its
sovereign authority. The Romanians had suggested to Egypt that those
among the settlers willing to stay under Egyptian administration be
allowed to remain, but with no extraterritorial Israeli military
protection.
5. The Secretary said that he had made similar suggestions. He
sensed that two of the air fields would not present a problem in the
end, and that Gamasy and Weizman had demonstrated some confi-
dence, which Sadat did not share, that the problem of the third air
field could be resolved satisfactorily. As for the settlements issue, the
Secretary said he thought it would have to be resolved by the Heads
of Government. If compromise proved impossible, one or the other
might have to give in. It was the sorest of all Sinai issues, and its
difficulty was compounded by press treatment of it. Sadat could not
risk being humiliated, while Begin has made a case that the settlements
were vital to Israeli security. For his own part, the Secretary said he
did not believe the security argument was convincing. Pungan said
that for Sadat, sovereignty was an issue of principle, which could not
be tampered with if he was to keep constructive good relations with
key Arab states. He noted that Sadat had offered large DMZ’s, and
this might be a way out of the problem. The Secretary said we had
taken virtually the same line.
6. Pungan and the Secretary agreed that the Palestinian issue was
the most delicate and difficult problem in the negotiations. The Secre-
tary explained how we had been trying to use the second agenda item
in Political Committee talks to develop a basic negotiating framework
for the West Bank/Gaza and Palestinian problems. Pungan said the
Romanians sensed that Israel wanted to confine any future negotiations
within the narrowest possible limits, involving only Palestinian resi-
dents in the occupied territories in a limited self-rule role. Romania
believed, however, that it was necessary to involve representatives of
the entire Palestinian community in the Middle East, including the

Romania
PLO, in an exercise in self-determination. One problem is that no one
knows for sure whether the PLO and the Palestinian diaspora would
in the end accept or reject something less than a fully independent
state, for example. The Palestinians were not monolithic, he said. He
went on to speculate that, in an initial period, the West Bank and Gaza
might develop their own administration and a degree of autonomy,
and there would also be changes in basic Arab-Israeli conditions. Who
could say for sure whether the PLO and others might find the new
situation unacceptable. He concluded that, even if the parties came to
an agreement on all other issues, a Middle East settlement will not
work unless it deals satisfactorily with the basic Palestinian issue.
7. The Secretary said that we had made clear the need for Palestinian
participation in the determination of their future, as in the Aswan
statement. There has to be some consent of the governed to what is
going on. The only real answer for the question of Palestinian represen-
tation, however, would be for the Arab confrontation states to come
up with some ideas and suggestions, including perhaps names, accept-
able to Israel. He agreed that the Israelis wanted to deal only with the
West Bank/Gaza aspect and acknowledged that the overall Palestinian
issue had to be resolved in the context of a larger settlement. That
broader issue was greater than who represented the Palestinians on
the West Bank and Gaza. Pungan argued that it was easier to deal
with the basic problem by broadening participation at the beginning.
The Secretary said conceptually this was correct, but practically it was
not easy.
8. The Secretary noted that Jordan felt the refugee problem should
be tackled in smaller steps, dealing initially with the 1967 refugees and
displaced persons, and then moving on.
9. Noting that the Romanians believed that the Arabs should now
elaborate some concrete proposals in lieu of making demands and
statements of principles, Pungan asked whether the West Bank/Gaza
under a UN administration would be practical for an interim period.
The Secretary said he had proposed this last spring to all parties, but
met with a mixed reception. The Israelis were particularly wary of
anything with a UN role.
10. The Secretary and Saunders said that the total Middle East
problem was so complex and so difficult to digest that there was
virtually no choice but to try to break it down into its component
elements and deal with them individually.
11. Pungan said another problem was wider Arab participation,
with Jordan in the first instance. He had met with both Assad and Arafat
shortly after Sadat’s Jerusalem visit. Assad gave him the impression
that he was not as opposed to Sadat’s efforts as had been portrayed.
He would wait and see the results, but he felt the initiative was not

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
well prepared. Assad made clear he would not close the doors to Syrian
involvement in a settlement. Even Arafat, Pungan added, was not 100
percent against the Sadat effort. Pungan did not rule out the possibility
that Syria, at some future stage, and even the PLO as well, would
accept a formula for their participation. Continuing, Pungan argued
that it was not enough to wait for such events; all concerned should
prepare the ground. Ceausescu had suggested that perhaps another
meeting, possibly organized under the UN, could be convened in
another city which could provide the cover for bringing in others,
including the Soviets.
12. The Secretary commented that the time may come when this
would be feasible, but he first wanted to see some progress in the
committee talks, and on a declaration of principles. Syria clearly would
not go to a meeting in Cairo, nor would the Soviets. He agreed with
Pungan that Egypt should at least keep the Syrians and even the Soviets
informed of what they have been doing. Pungan said the Soviets will
not go to Geneva, for example, merely to put their signature on a
settlement already negotiated without their participation. The Secretary
said that he, too, tried to keep the Soviets generally informed.
13. The Secretary observed that the PLO had been hurting its cause
recently. He noted the murder of the PLO rep in London showed the
strains within the PLO.
14. Pungan was gratified that both Sadat and Begin had made
comparatively temperate speeches after the Jerusalem break up. It was
important that diplomacy through the press be calmed and that the
sharp public rhetoric end. This was the thrust of Romanian advice to
Begin and Sadat. He was also encouraged by the two parties leaving
open a future reconvening of the Security Committee. The Secretary
said that his guess was that the Security Committee might be convened
within the next seven to fourteen days; he was less optimistic about a
reconvened Political Committee meeting. It depended upon the atmos-
pherics, and he noted there were ideas for rotating meetings between
Cairo and Jerusalem, or even meeting in the Sinai buffer zone.
15. Summing up, the Secretary said that, in most respects, the
Romanian and U.S. analysis and approach to the problem were similar;
there were some differences in our respective views of the Palestinian
issue and the PLO. The Secretary thanked Pungan for coming to Wash-
ington to share with him Ceausescu’s views.
Vance

Romania
191.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
Romania1
40781. Subject: Secretary’s Meeting With Romanian Emissary
Pungan.
1. Romanian Emissary Pungan met with the Secretary on February
14 for an hour to exchange views on the outcomes of Sadat’s visits to
the U.S. and Romania.2
2. The Secretary said that Sadat had arrived in a gloomy mood,
believing that Israel had not reciprocated his Jerusalem initiative. He
was questioning whether progress could be achieved. After his talks
with the President, with members of Congress, and with citizen groups,
he left Washington reassured. He reached basic agreement with us that
the peace process should go forward and he agreed to do his part. The
White House statement following the President’s final meeting with
Sadat set out our fundamental positions on all major aspects of the
negotiations, including the applicability of 242 to all fronts, resolution
of the Palestinian problem in all its aspects, and the view that Israeli
settlements were contrary to international law and constituted an obsta-
cle to the peace effort.
3. Continuing, the Secretary said that Sadat had also agreed that
Atherton should go to the Middle East to help stimulate progress on
a declaration of principles, among other things.
4. The Secretary then described the administration’s decisions
announced earlier in the day for the provision of aircraft to Egypt,
Saudi Arabia, and Israel. The decisions reflected long-standing commit-
ments in principle made to Israel and Saudi Arabia. All parties will
receive less than they would have liked except the Saudis.
Exdis. Drafted by Draper; cleared by Luers and Nimetz; approved by Atherton. Sent
for information to Cairo, Damacus, Jidda, Tel Aviv, and Amman.
14, the Embassy reported that the Syrian Ambassador wondered aloud if the Romanian/
Egyptian communiqué “represented new resolve of Egypt to ‘abandon’ bilateral talks
with Israel in favor of wider discussion.” While Syria would not participate in a Cairo
meeting, he added that “it had not ruled out meeting under Waldheim’s auspices.” The
Embassy also noted that Sadat’s time in Romania was very limited, making any meeting
with a third party highly unlikely despite rumors of a senior PLO representative being
in Bucharest at the same time. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
5. Pungan said that Sadat had arrived in Bucharest in a good mood,
mentioning the encouragement he received in his visits to Washington,
London, and Bonn. He was pleased with the White House statement
as well as President Carter’s other statements. He was highly pleased
with his meeting with Peres, Pungan said, indicating that it had given
him, Sadat, a better insight into the differing internal forces in Israel.
6. On the other hand, Pungan said, Sadat remained deeply con-
cerned underneath his good spirits that useful progress would not be
achieved as rapidly as he needed it. He made clear it would put him
in a bad position, both internally and in terms of his relations with other
Arab States. Ceausescu, impressed with Sadat’s arguments, believes
everything possible should now be done to encourage Israel to agree
to a declaration of principles acceptable to Sadat. This could open a
new phase, permitting Sadat to improve his relations with other Arabs
and possibly open the way to their joining the process. Pungan said
that Sadat was in much need of other Arab gestures.
7. Pungan then conveyed Ceausescu’s concern that a declaration
of principles might—implicitly or indirectly in references to withdrawal
or the Sinai settlements—undercut Sadat’s need for undisputed sover-
eignty over the area. The Secretary said there was nothing in the pro-
posed declaration which could affect the Egyptian position in this
regard, and noted that five of its six general paragraphs had already
been largely agreed by Egypt and Israel.
8. Pungan said that the Romanians were considering how they
might be helpful. He mentioned the Waldheim idea (i.e., for a New
York meeting), and the Secretary noted that Waldheim still held that
option open. The question was not forums; it was all-important to
move forward on a declaration of principles. Regarding the Romanian’s
basic question, the Secretary added, we would be talking to Dayan on
the 16th to explore what might be done about the remaining issues.
Atherton would continue the efforts in his Middle East Mission. At
the moment, the Secretary said, he didn’t know what else could be
brought to bear on the problem or to convince Begin that time was short.
9. Pungan said his own idea was the U.S. should talk to the Soviets.
The Secretary said he had talked with Dobrynin earlier in the day, had
given him a detailed description of the Sadat meetings, and had asked
that the Soviets remained open-minded and flexible about a declaration
of principles. Dobrynin pressed for specifics of our thinking on an
interim regime for the West Bank and Gaza. The Secretary said it was
a good exchange and that Dobrynin appeared interested. Romania, he
continued, could be helpful by also urging the Soviets to be open-
minded and flexible, and not to put obstacles in the present path.
Pungan mused that Romania might consider encouraging the Soviets
to ease up on the Arabs and allow them to make their own decisions

Romania
about gestures to Sadat. He said Dayan had been invited to visit
Bucharest.
10. Pungan said that he did not rule out a helpful Syrian gesture
to Sadat. When the Secretary questioned this, Pungan said that he had
reached this conclusion on the basis of the last Romanian meetings
with Assad. Assad could eventually move to the point where Hussein
is now, he conjectured, although slowly and step-by-step. The Secretary
commented that this would be helpful, and noted that Atherton would
be visiting Damascus during his Middle East trip.
11. Pungan said that the Romanians were apprehensive about unex-
pected explosions in the area as well as the unpredictable nature of
Sadat’s diplomacy. They were concerned with Begin’s habits of talking
to the press and allowing Israeli points of view to become ironclad
through premature public disclosure. The Secretary agreed. With Sadat,
we had made clear the need to consult in advance and not to be faced
with such unexpected steps as the Egyptian delegation’s withdrawal
from the Jerusalem talks. In Israel there was a disposition to put to the
Cabinet all important issues, and this resulted in almost instant leaks.
We had urged the Israelis to discuss sensitive issues in the Defense
Committee, which has only five or six Ministers.
12. Pungan noted that the Romanians had the impression that the
people on both sides in the Military Committee did not believe the
security argument for the Sinai settlements was important. The Secre-
tary said that—in the end—these were basically political questions
which had to be resolved at a political level.
13. Before turning to certain bilateral issues, the Secretary thanked
Pungan for this exchange and said he would communicate any further
information, if it developed, through Ambassador Nicolae.
14. The Secretary and Pungan briefly discussed the Soviet position
regarding the Basket III formulation at the Belgrade Conference on
European Security and Cooperation. They noted that a date had been
set for special U.S.-Romanian consultations under the disarmament
program. The Secretary mentioned the French idea for a “new forum,”
noting he wasn’t sure what they intended or whether they had worked
it out fully in advance.
15. Pungan concluded the meeting with a request that the U.S.
develop an appropriate financial facility for handling U.S. exports to
Romania before Ceausescu’s Washington visit. This could be an impor-
tant new step in U.S.-Romanian relations.
Vance

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
192.
Briefing Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State
for European Affairs (Vest) to Secretary of State Vance1
Washington, March 21, 1978
SUBJECT
State Visit of Romanian President Ceausescu—A Preview
I. Setting and Objectives
Ceausescu’s visit is a logical complement to Tito’s trip in March
as a step forward in U.S. relations with Eastern Europe. Both countries
are important to us because they have successfully preserved their
independence from the USSR. Both regard good relations with the
United States and the PRC as vital to their security.
Our long-standing policy of improving relations with Romania
was reaffirmed by the President in PD–21, which directed that the
United States accord favored treatment to those Eastern European
countries which are relatively autonomous in foreign policy or rela-
tively liberal internally.2 Our interest in supporting Romanian inde-
pendence continues undiminished.
At the same time, the visit provides an opportunity for discussion
of human rights issues and for encouraging further Romanian action
on humanitarian problems such as divided families and binational
marriages.3 We have made significant progress in recent years but
there is more to be done. We want to urge some liberalization of
Romania’s tight internal policy, while aware that Ceausescu considers
internal discipline a prerequisite for the maintenance of Romania’s
independence from Moscow, its territorial integrity and economic
growth. To achieve further progress, we must persuade Ceausescu that
Analysis for the Commonwealth and Eastern Europe, Office Subject Files, 1965–1980,
by Andrews and Fromowitz, and in EUR/PP, C, S/P, and HA/HR. Luers initialed the
memorandum for Vest. The date is handwritten at the top of the first page.
2 See Document 16.
3 Derian met with Pungan on February 14, and discussed human rights, an ongoing
cause of tension between Washington and Bucharest. Derian raised U.S. concern regard-
ing emigration from Romania, as well as the rights of the Hungarian minority. Emigration,
Derian told Pungan, was directly related to the ability of the U.S. Government to extend
MFN status to Romania under the Jackson-Vanik Amendment. The Carter administration
took a new direction regarding human rights, “and it is only fair to explain our concerns
to the GOR and to point out that these factors affect our decisions and our relations
with other countries,” Derian told Pungan. (Telegram 43849 to Bucharest, February 18;

Romania
U.S. interest in human rights affairs in no way signifies a lessening of
U.S. support for Romanian independence and territorial integrity.
Ceausescu’s approach to global issues in his talks with the President
must be seen against the backdrop of uncertainty during the mid-
1970’s. During that period, Ceausescu’s perception of drift in U.S. policy
and the Chinese succession crisis led him, as insurance, to seek a mini-
reconciliation with the USSR in 1976, at what he saw as the low point
of U.S. and Chinese resolve. With new Administrations in place in
China and the U.S., Ceausescu has again distanced himself from the
Soviets on key issues, including the Middle East, CSCE and Eurocom-
munism. In his talks with the President, he will be looking for a firm
U.S. commitment to play a major stabilizing role in global affairs on
both political and economic issues and to develop vigorous relation-
ships with countries like Romania.
Similarly, Ceausescu’s approach to bilateral issues will be colored
by the current stage of U.S.-Romanian relations. These have entered a
period in which both countries are paying more attention to practical
problem-solving than exciting new initiatives. Some of the early enthu-
siasm has been dissipated. New tangible evidence we can give of our
interest in Romania is limited. Our increased attention to other Eastern
European countries, especially Poland and Hungary, has diminished
in Ceausescu’s eyes Romania’s special relationship with the U.S. While
the visit itself will serve to reassure Ceausescu, he will press for eco-
nomic advantages to which the Romanians attribute political signifi-
cance. These will include most-favored-nation tariff status (MFN) on
a long-term basis, credit on favorable terms, easing of export controls,
and increased U.S. Government support for U.S.-Romanian industrial
cooperation, including projects in third countries.
In this setting, we believe the best way for the President to set the
stage for the talks is to begin by taking Ceausescu into his confidence
on the U.S. approach to major global issues. These would include our
world-wide support for human rights, U.S.-Soviet and U.S.-Chinese
relations, SALT, and MBFR, our approach to Eastern and Western
Europe and the CSCE process, North-South relations, nuclear nonpro-
liferation, Africa and the Middle East. Ceausescu may also wish to
discuss the role of the nonaligned and, since he is planning a trip to
Korea, he may have some ideas here as well. In its policies toward
the Middle East and many aspects of the Belgrade CSCE conference,
Romania has acted constructively and stood apart from the Warsaw
Pact consensus. It is in our interest to reinforce such Romanian actions
on their own merits. But cultivating Ceausescu’s desire to play an
important and moderate role on international issues has another bene-
fit. It makes it easier for us to influence Ceausescu favorably on issues,
such as human rights, where he sees us as the demandeur.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
II. Key Issues
1. Human Rights: Ceausescu will be prepared to discuss human
rights, and we will recommend that the President outline our general
policy and the values we support. We will recommend that the Presi-
dent make clear the importance to the Administration and the Congress
of favorable and prompt action on emigration and marriage requests,
including emigration to Israel, particularly if Romania wishes eventu-
ally to obtain most-favored tariff status on a long-term basis.
There is disagreement within the Department on how to approach
three subjects: Romanian treatment of the Hungarian minority, human
rights considerations with respect to loans from international financial
institutions, and the Rauta case. We are seeking to resolve this
disagreement.4
2. Credits: The Romanians have long been pushing for large-scale
credits on near-concessional terms for economic development. Despite
previous rebuffs, Ceausescu may well raise this subject with the Presi-
dent. We cannot meet such a request, but in order to encourage Romani-
ans to respond to our interests, we are asking the Export-Import Bank
to study the possibility of a line of credit and perhaps expansion of the
Cooperative Financing Facility (CFF) in addition to project-linked loans.
3. Export Controls: Ceausescu may complain at the restrictions
imposed on exports of high-technology U.S. goods to Romania. An
inter-agency review of our export control policy with respect to Roma-
nia is now underway. We are considering recommending some liberali-
zation of commodity (as opposed to technology) exports, which appears
to be possible without jeopardizing our strategic interests.5
ment between EUR and HA concerning the level at which issues such as the treatment
of the Hungarian minority and the family reunification case of Romanian defector Con-
stantin Rauta should be raised. HA supported the position that these issues be raised
by the President, or, failing that, by the Secretary of State. EUR supported the position
of keeping these issues in discussions at lower levels. Furthermore, the administration
was coming under pressure from Congress—66 members of Congress had sent a letter
to the White House indicating their concern with violations of human rights in Romania.
5 In preparation for Ceausescu’s visit, an interagency group was formed to look
into the possibility of loosening export controls toward Romania. The Department of
Commerce and the Department of State supported some limited liberalization of export
controls for commodities, while the Department of Defense continued to oppose for fear
that such controlled technology might end up in Soviet hands. EUR hoped that by
Ceausescu’s visit a definitive answer on policy toward Romania regarding export controls
might be announced. (Telegram 47748 to Bucharest, February 24; National Archives, RG

Romania
193.
Intelligence Information Cable1
Washington, March 31, 1978
COUNTRY
Romania
SUBJECT
Appraisal of Situation: Goals and Problems of Ceausescu’s Romania on the Eve
of his Fourth Visit to the United States (DOI: March 1978)
SOURCE
[1 paragraph (5 lines) not declassified]
INTRODUCTION:
1. This is an assessment of Romania’s political situation on the eve
of President Ceausescu’s visit to the United States. It focuses primarily
on internal political factors within the economic and social framework
of the country and also discusses foreign policy and military considera-
tions. Trying to assess those problems with which the regime will have
to deal over the next five years, this paper is necessarily weighted
toward the negative side rather than toward the regime’s past accom-
plishments. For example, instead of discussing the considerable
improvements in living standards, the paper focuses on the mounting
pressures from rising expectations. Similarly, there are important seg-
ments at all levels who believe in the system and have no desire to
change it. This paper, however, while acknowledging this group’s
existence, concentrates on the factors which have the potential to force
the regime off its current course in the next few years.
2. The denouement of the leadership situations in Yugoslavia and
the Soviet Union may affect Romania in decisive ways but is not dis-
cussed here as our knowledge of these situations is conjectural.
Summary and Conclusions:
3. President Ceausescu runs a highly centralized power system
with its main objectives being to maintain as high a degree of independ-
ence from the Soviet Union as is possible and reach a competitive level
of industrialization as fast as possible. It is symbolized by a personality
cult so intense that a Soviet diplomat in Bucharest recently said that
his country had witnessed nothing quite like it even under Stalin. At
Analysis for the Commonwealth and Eastern Europe, Office Subject Files, 1965–1980,
Carlucci forwarded the cable to Brzezinski on April 13. (Ibid.)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
the same time, both Ceausescu and his wife have several relatives in
the power structure. The regime is stable. Short of his accidental death,
Ceausescu seems likely to be around for the foreseeable future. At 60,
he is the youngest East European leader, is in apparent good health,
and has no known political opposition. The population is kept on a
short leash, even by East European standards, although Romanian
leadership could substantially relax present internal controls without
risking Soviet retaliation. It is evidently Ceausescu’s belief that, to attain
difficult development goals, the population must be strictly controlled.
As a result, there is little freedom of expression, people are afraid to
deviate from the official line, officials avoid responsibility, and people
are generally cynical.
4. Internal problems are those brought about by rapid industrializa-
tion at the price of insufficient supplies in the consumer sector. Social
tensions are rising and muted, but serious dissatisfactions exist among
the workers, the national minorities (especially the Magyars), and the
intellectuals. Although these problems are real, the regime will be less
and less able to count on a docile population, and Ceausescu may have
to rearrange his priorities. There is no indication that any one problem
will become a danger to the regime’s continued existence in the next
few years.
5. Well known for its flexible foreign policy, Romania has been
successful at establishing political and trade relations with an unusually
diverse group of countries in its attempt to obtain support from all
directions for its relatively independent views from the Soviet Union.
Romania is a weak link in the Warsaw Pact alliance as it participates
in Warsaw Pact activities to a minimal extent, it has only limited loyalty
to its alliance with the Soviet Union, and its armed forces are rela-
tively untrained.
6. Ceausescu is an able tactician who, without changing his goals,
has shown a certain amount of personal flexibility in handling difficult
situations. He will probably attempt to solve crises on a case by case
basis and, where there is a conflict, by removing the symptoms rather
than altering Romanian external or internal objectives in any substan-
tive way. Whether he is successful will depend in part on external
factors over which he has no control and on a race between attaining
industrial development and the demands of a population rapidly grow-
ing in sophistication.
ECONOMICS:
7. While skillful in producing impressive statistics (Romania has
claimed the highest rate of production increases in Eastern Europe for
years), in terms meaningful to the population, Romania is also the
poorest East European nation, except for Albania. For example, its level

Romania
of personal consumption is only two-thirds the level of Bulgaria and
one-half that of East Germany. Housing is cramped (especially since
the earthquake in March 1977), wages are among the lowest in Europe,
high-quality consumer goods are extremely scarce, and there is no
letup in sight at least through the next five year plan (1985) when
Romania is supposed to leave the ranks of the “developing” nations.
8. Romania’s forced draft industrialization has brought the country
to an economic crossroad. The country is entering a new era of tighten-
ing resource constraints. It can no longer throw more labor, or capital,
at economic problems and hope to solve them. It is running out of
both. Depending mostly on labor intensive methods, it has a labor
shortage (a program to transfer office workers to “productive” work in
factories and fields was begun last year). Although it is an oil producer,
Romania has recently become a net energy importer, mainly because
its in-ground crude oil and gas reserves are 20 percent depleted leaving
only about a 10-year supply. [Headquarters comment: Using current tech-
nical procedures and equipment, it is difficult to extract any more than
25 percent of the reserves contained in a deposit.]2 It must switch from
extensive to intensive development, that is, it must increase efficiency
and generally improve the ingredients in the economic formula.
9. There is evidence that the leadership is recognizing these prob-
lems, as it has announced some measures of decentralization and
improved quality controls. It will take some time, however, before the
speeches are translated into concrete directives at the factory level. A
problem in implementing any changes is the lack of a consultative
mechanism with the workers. Although government and party person-
nel changes announced on 8 March appear to be aimed mainly at the
economic sector, it seems doubtful that substantive reforms will take
place in the near future.
10. It is not at all clear, however, that the leadership is ready to
deal with the important strains in the country’s social fabric brought
about by rapid industrialization. Since the beginning of World War II,
the population has been told to make personal sacrifices for the benefit
of the collective good. These sacrifices continue, as Romania has an
extremely high rate (one-third of its national income) of reinvestment.
Although living standards have improved, Romanians generally give
credit not to government policies but to improvement of world living
conditions in general. Many have relatives in the West and know that,
by comparison, life in Romania is primitive. Although Romania is a
net food exporter, shortages of staple foods are constant, and we have
heard about villages stopping meat-exporting trucks near the border.
2 Brackets in the original.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
Although education is free and medical and social services are cheap,
it is often difficult to overcome the necessary bureaucratic obstacles
without bribing each petty and not so petty official in the chain leading
to the service in question. Because housing and services are inexpensive,
Romanian workers can often save some money. But frustration rises
as money income outpaces supplies of popular consumer goods. Salary
increases scheduled during the rest of this five year plan then will be
two-edged swords. It appears as if the new policies discussed above
would, if implemented, first cause a drop in real productivity and
wages, which would only increase popular frustrations.
11. Last year’s Jiu Valley worker unrest, with which the general
population sympathized, points out that there is a limit to the workers’
passivity. Their success will not be lost on workers of other industrial
complexes in the country.
12. While Romania was primarily a rural country before and imme-
diately following World War II, its work force has been rapidly chang-
ing over to industry (74 percent of the working population worked in
industrialization comes heightened political awareness and realization
that there are more similarities than differences between the current
system and its Ottoman and monarchist predecessors. As seen by many
workers, high party and government officials appear to enjoy the same
privileges as their predecessors. When these officials’ homes or offices
are in buildings formerly occupied by members of the royal family,
the basic lack of social progress is blatant.
13. Every day the Romanian population suffers total immersion in
statistics put out by the media which are designed to prove the success
of party policies and to show the country’s economic achievements.
An increasing number of people are wondering when they will begin
to benefit directly from these improvements. The regime cannot spur
economic growth indefinitely at the expense of the population’s stand-
ard of living without creating a deep well of frustrations.
14. The factors discussed above are converging, and Ceausescu
may be forced to reorder his priorities to give the consumer a better
break if violence is to be avoided before Romania joins the ranks of
“developed” countries.
DISSIDENCE:
15. The recent appearance of a former high Romanian Communist
Party official to publicize the situation of the minorities in Romania is
a reminder that, internally, Romania is not quite the maverick it often
appears to be. As Jean-Francois Revel wrote in a recent issue of “Foreign
Affairs”: “Derussification is not democratization. . . The most totalitar-
ian of all the popular democracies of Eastern Europe is Romania, which

Romania
as a nation-state is the one that least follows Soviet foreign policy.
Nonalignment is a concept that has to do with the will of the leadership
to be all-powerful and not with the will of the people to be free.” The
brief existence of an intellectual dissident group, and several work
stoppages last year are symptoms of serious domestic discontent. That
there are not more “dissident” activists is probably because of fear, the
efficiency of the security organs, and the passivity of the Romanian
character, and not because of harmonious internal conditions. In a
society where listening to Radio Free Europe (RFE) is against the law
(one which is unevenly applied as 61 percent of Romanians do listen
to RFE) and can be punished by a fine of up to 5,000 lei (about two
and one-half times the average monthly salary), there is no place for
a phenomenon such as Warsaw’s illegal “flying universities.” Without
determined leadership or cooperation among the various groups, how-
ever, dissidents will continue to have limited impact.
INTELLECTUALS:
16. According to its own measures, Romania has an overbalance
of intellectuals, that is, persons with no vocational or directly produc-
tive skills per se. The regime views its people primarily as productive
units and believes that it is the individual’s first goal to serve the needs
of society as perceived by the leadership. Historians (there is no place
for philosophers outside the strict confines of Party dialectics) and
artists, who both depend on the state for their salaries, are kept busy
with propaganda projects designed to justify official policies and exhort
the working population to greater effort. Some intellectuals are report-
edly doing solid work in their fields; however, since creative prose can
be dangerous to the author, many writers turn to translating foreign
classics into Romanian. Among the things that the intellectuals share
with the general population are their repugnance for Ceausescu’s per-
sonality cult, for nepotism at many levels of the hierarchy, and for the
privileges enjoyed by high Party and government leaders.
17. As a group, intellectuals are passive; their dissidence quotient
is low. They seek to accommodate themselves to the current ruling
class’s whims and dictates in such a way as to ensure a safe and
comfortable life.
MINORITIES:
18. The Hungarian minority in Romania (which will be referred
to as Magyars hereafter), comprising roughly 10 percent of the popula-
tion, is the largest national minority in Europe. There are also about
one-half million Germans but only enough Romanian Jews to fill a
good-size stadium. These two groups are less vocal, however, prefer-
ring to emigrate or otherwise solve their problems with the help of
influential external sovereign sponsors. The Magyars, not encouraged

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
to emigrate by Hungary which would have great difficulties absorbing
them, wish to retain the manifestations of their ethnic origins in their
everyday life while also enjoying equal opportunities. They strongly
believe that not only are their human rights being denied but that it
is Romanian policy to eradicate them as a distinct group. Although
many Magyars were purged from government positions during late
Party leader Gheorghiu-Dej’s strict nationalities policy in the 1950s,
Ceausescu is being more cautious. The objective, creating a unified
state in which national differences are either forgotten or at least mini-
mized in favor of unswerving allegiance to Romania, remains the same.
But there are still several Hungarian-language newspapers and periodi-
cals, a large number of locally published books, and state-subsidized
theaters, radio and television programs. In Transylvania there are Hun-
garian-language primary and secondary schools, and some university
courses are taught in Hungarian. Nevertheless, the trend is toward
integration of Magyar with Romanian institutions, dispersal of Magyars
to non-Magyar areas, and importation of ethnic Romanian workers for
new industries being opened in Transylvania.
19. To the extent that people are being moved successfully, the
plan is working. Once practically 100 percent Magyar, the Transylva-
nian capital of Cluj is now only 40 percent Magyar, and Hungarian-
language street signs have disappeared. As Magyar families are forced
to move to other areas to find work, their children will increasingly
grow up in a Romanian environment. Magyars, however, are proud
of their heritage, resent the minimal role allowed their ancestors in
official Romanian history, and in fact tend to believe that they come
from a superior culture. As they do not particularly hide this feeling,
they get little sympathy from Romanians, some of whom still nurse a
sense of grievance over 19th and 20th century Hungarian attempts
to “Magyarize” ethnic Romanians. Some have fresher and personal
bitterness over the harsh treatment accorded to Romanians during
World War II before Romanian jurisdiction over Transylvania was
reestablished in 1945.
20. As gradually as Ceausescu tries to move on this issue, he will
run into problems. After a lifetime of personal sacrifices and seen
against the backdrop of an entire population which has just been told
(during the December 1977 Party Conference) that life will be at least
as difficult for another eight years, the Magyars must carry the extra
burden of their nationality. But, given the low quality of life anywhere
in Romania, even the Magyars (unless they receive help from outside)
will probably continue to give priority to personal economic survival
over the flourishing of their culture.
FOREIGN POLICY:
21. It is in this field that Romania is best known. The most basic
reality for Romanian policymakers is the country’s geographic location

Romania
on the Soviet Union’s southern border. But, except for its periodic
polemics with the Soviet Union over Bessarabia and North Bukovina
(annexed by the Soviet Union in 1940), all of Romania’s foreign policy
efforts have been aimed at making everyone forget or overlook its “little
brother” relationship to its northern neighbor and its membership in
the Warsaw Pact Treaty Organization.
22. Although Romanian diplomats can be found pursuing their
nationalistic policies in many international forums, they seem to have
concentrated their efforts on establishing relations with Peking, Wash-
ington, and the Third World in order to balance Romania’s relations
with the Soviets. In the Third World, they have succeeded in carving
a niche for Romania as a quasi-nonaligned state without, however,
being able to gain formal acceptance to the nonaligned movement
(NAM). Although there seems to be growing disillusionment on the
part of African countries over their relations with Romania, as well as
with the quality of Romanian goods received, there is no indication
that Romania intends to cool its ardor in seeking Third World friends
and markets. In fact, it is renewing its campaign to become a full
member of the NAM in preparation for NAM meetings scheduled this
year and next, and it is allocating a larger ratio of its foreign trade to
the Third World. Interestingly, trade figures also show a projected
larger share for the East European Economic Organization (CEMA).
Increases in both the Third World and CEMA will be at the expense
of trade with the industrialized countries, reflecting probable Romanian
disappointment that its opening to the West has not paid off in eco-
nomic terms as rapidly as it had hoped.
23. Having apparently played a role in arranging the first U.S.
contacts with the People’s Republic of China in 1972, Romania has
kept its taste for middleman situations, most recently having played
a role in Sadat’s visit to Israel. There were some apparently unfounded
rumors in Bucharest earlier this year that Ceausescu was exploring the
possibility of stepping into the Moroccan-Algerian Sahara problem, and
there are similar rumors now concerning the Cambodian-Vietnamese
conflict. Romania takes obvious pride at having good relations with
all countries regardless of their politics, and Ceausescu has a well-
known penchant for wishing to build up his own and his country’s
prestige (which in Gaullist fashion he probably does not separate) by
involving himself in such go-between roles. Given these two ingredi-
ents, Ceausescu may be given somewhat more credit than he deserves
in the face of scarce information on these situations.
24. Along with its semi-independent foreign policy, Romania has
an extreme aversion to being overlooked on such questions as MBFR
and is very active at disarmament and other international forums (for
example, recently at Belgrade), and at promoting its ideas behind a

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
smokescreen of fighting for the rights of the small countries in the face
of the overbearing nature of the great powers.
25. At the same time, the Romanian leadership is always conscious
of the great power factor in any situation which somehow touches
Romania. The regime is quick to point to the problems of others and
even quicker to blame its own failures on external or uncontrollable
events such as the 1975 flood or the 1977 earthquake. This leads to
occasional overinterpretation of real or imagined signals, to blaming
the Ottoman Empire for countless current Romanian problems, to imag-
ining that visiting American scholars and the few Romanian dissidents
are spies, and to seeing the Soviet hand in the current Hungarian
minority problem. Admittedly, there are historical precedents for the
last example.
MILITARY:
26. In keeping with Romania’s wish to be as independent as her
politico-geographical situation permits vis-a-vis the Soviet Union, it
participates as little as possible in Warsaw Pact activities. There are
no Soviet troops on Romanian soil; neither do Warsaw Pact troop
maneuvers take place in Romania. In the same way that the Soviet
Union would like Romania to be more fully integrated into CEMA, so
has it been trying to move Romania closer to its military alliance. That
the Soviet Union is not trying harder is probably a reflection of the
Soviet view of the current and foreseeable threat on its southern flank.
Should the Soviet perception of this threat change, there is no question
that Romania would have little choice but to play the game according
to Soviet rules. Although there would be initial armed resistance to a
Soviet invasion of the type seen in Hungary in 1956 or Prague in 1968,
the regime would be forced to give Soviet troops transit rights if the
Soviet Union believed it needed to send troops to Yugoslavia or Bul-
garia. Depending, on the circumstances, however, it seems probable
that the USSR would transit Romania only as a last choice, preferring
instead to overfly Romania, to take the Black Sea route, or to go through
Hungary. At the same time, Romania would probably be more agree-
able to a transit request if the final destination were Bulgaria rather
than Yugoslavia, with whom it has more in common and whose own
relative independence from Moscow is an important prop to Bucha-
rest’s go-it-alone attitude in foreign affairs. If the Soviet Union wanted
to station troops on Romanian soil against a foreign (non-Romanian)
threat, however, Romania would probably accede. Such an occupation
would not be popular, but, as it has done before through countless
occupations (and in a way as it is doing now under Ceausescu), the
people would concentrate on surviving rather than on fighting back.
That Romania has been able to become and remain a national entity

Romania
is more a result of the cleverness of its diplomats than of the might of
its armies.
27. To a large extent, the relative loyalties of the armed forces tend
to reflect those of the population but, as it receives more ideological
indoctrination, probably at a somewhat higher level of intensity. Since
loyalty to the country is highest, the regime has skillfully promoted
Ceausescu and the Party as synonymous with Romania. Loyalty to the
Warsaw Pact is the weakest link in the loyalty chain.
28. In terms of ability, the technical services (that is, Navy, Air
Force, and Air Defense) are far better trained than the Army, essentially
a vast labor pool which receives little training above the small-unit
level. It is the assessment of the Bucharest Embassy Defense Attache
that any Warsaw Pact operation would be far better off without a
Romanian Army unit during a combined operation.
29. Mistrust of the minorities is reflected by their status in the
armed forces. There are very few minorities represented in the officer
corps, for example. Enlisted men from ethnic groups are almost auto-
matically placed in engineer units where they are little more than
unskilled labor troops.
30. [less than 1 line not declassified] the Ambassador has read this
report [less than 1 line not declassified] he considers it “a comprehensive
statement which highlights the main problems and current areas of
potential conflict in the Ceausescu regime’s management of Romania.”
In the Ambassador’s view, however, “the report’s skepticism concern-
ing Romanian achievements and possibilities is somewhat overdrawn,
and it leans toward the lowest available estimates of quality of life/
standard of living in Romania (i.e., vis-a-vis Bulgaria, Yugoslavia and
the USSR, where other estimates show Romania equal or ahead). This
penchant extends also to judgments on politics . . . ” where, the Ambas-
sador believes, “there is an underestimation of Ceausescu’s potential,
and that of his regime, for development in both the political and eco-
nomic/social spheres.”)
31. [less than 1 line not declassfied]
32. [less than 1 line not declassified]

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
194.
Paper Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1
Washington, April 5, 1978
SUBJECT
Ceausescu’s Romania: A Situation Report
1. As head of state and Secretary General of the ruling communist
party, President Ceausescu is very obviously the supreme national
leader of Romania today and we are not aware of any individual or
faction within the leadership that could challenge his position. The
personality cult that enshrines him is rivaled only by that of North
Korea’s Kim Il-song.2
2. Ceausescu keeps leading party and government functionaries
under control and off balance by means of a periodic rotation of top
personnel, which can affect even his closest associates. Although these
arbitrary shifts, as well as the elevation of his wife, Elena, to high party
posts, have caused resentment within the hierarchy, the grumbling is
likely to remain within bounds.
3. In contrast to its outward-looking and independent foreign poli-
cies, the regime maintains perhaps the most authoritarian domestic
controls among Warsaw Pact states. Bucharest’s tactics in dealing with
the small manifestation of dissidence that formed around author Paul
Goma last year was to isolate individual dissidents and allow them to
emigrate. The movement has since collapsed.3
4. Instances of workers’ unrest, including a slowdown in a major
coal mining region in August, represented a potentially more serious
Confidential. The paper was prepared in the National Foreign Assessment Center.
2 In preparation for the trip to Washington, the CIA also circulated a biographic
research paper in March, entitled “Nicolae Ceausescu: Romania’s Maverick Leader.” The
paper described him as possessing “shrewdness and flexibility in anticipating potential
political crises and circumventing them.” “However,” the paper continued, “a recent
psychiatric evaluation depicts him as possessing an unshakable belief in the wisdom of
his decisions, an intense attachment to his goals, and a conviction that he alone knows
what’s best for his country.” (National Archives, RG 59, Bureau of Intelligence and
Research, Office of Analysis for the Commonwealth and Eastern Europe, Office Subject
3 The Office of Research and Political Analysis at the CIA disseminated a report
arguing that “resumption of wide-scale political dissident activity appears dim.” (Central

Romania
challenge to Ceausescu’s authority.4 Early this year there were also
reports of restlessness among Romania’s approximately two million
Magyars. This minority is disturbed over alleged cultural and educa-
tional discrimination and what the Magyars perceive as a systematic
Romanian effort to gradually assimilate all national minorities.5
5. Ceausescu has reacted to these symptoms of popular discontent
with an extensive reorganization of the state security apparatus. He
personally assumed the security portfolio on the party secretariat. This,
together with other high-level personnel changes in the Interior Minis-
try suggest that he wants to avoid a repetition of future instances
of unrest.
6. The main problems currently facing Romania continue to be in
the economic domain. The long-term goal, of course, is to turn the
country into a modern industrialized communist state. Ceausescu
hopes to achieve this objective within an integrated, centrally oriented
framework.
7. In 1977, the economy experienced almost unprecedented difficul-
ties mainly as a result of energy, labor and hard currency shortages.
Natural causes—including a devastating earthquake and a drought
that adversely affected agricultural output—compounded the difficul-
ties. As a result, economic growth was the lowest in years.
8. Earlier this year Ceausescu announced a program aimed at
redressing the country’s economic problems. While retaining the full
mechanism of centralized planning, the scheme hinted at greater self-
reliance for enterprises in order to promote efficiency and productivity.
4 Rumors of labor unrest in the Jiu Valley, a major coal mining region of central
the Embassy reported Ceausescu’s unplanned “working visit” to the area to quell the
growing rebellion. Ceausescu’s visit “is very much in keeping for him to rush to the
scene of trouble to put out the fire.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
Bucharest, that Ceausescu was back in the Jiu Valley, noting the “gross emphasis on
the role of Ceausescu personally—not the Party, not the Government, not other leaders”
in resolving the labor issues in the region. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
reported it received credible information that over 4,000 miners and their families had
been relocated from the Jiu Valley back to their original areas, mainly the economically
5 During his meeting with Andrei in Bucharest, March 31, Vanik discussed the issue
and emphasized that he understood Romanian concerns with demonstrations against
Ceausescu during his visit to the United States, but believed the numbers would be
small and it would not interfere with the protocol of his visit. Andrei told Vanik that
“agitation by Hungarian emigrants as well as by Hungarians here in Romania is ‘fed
from the outside.’” (Memorandum of conversation, March 31; National Archives, RG
59, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Office of Analysis for the Commonwealth
Political Relations)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
The program threatened to make government assistance dependent on
an enterprise’s ability to show a profit. We believe that the policy of
“self-financing,” as announced by Ceausescu, if implemented, would
place enterprise managers in a precarious position. The central authori-
ties demand increased productivity, even though the workers’ capabil-
ity of providing it is already strained. There are indications, however,
that when it is implemented, the program may turn out to be less
drastic than originally presented.
9. Workers’ unrest last year was caused by the requirement to
perform overtime work without pay, a reduction in retirement benefits
and experiments with the unpopular productivity-wage linkage. Under
the new program, underfulfillment of production targets by enterprises
would result in wage cuts for workers. Despite the regime’s hopes to
the contrary, this could again foment instances of unrest.
10. In an effort to facilitate the program, Ceausescu undertook a
major reshuffle of the hierarchy last month. The shifts involved mainly
the top officials of the planning, foreign trade, finance and industrial
construction sectors. The scope of the transfers, which included some
of Ceausescu’s closest associates, suggests that he is making an all-out
attempt to put the economy on a better footing.
11. Ceausescu’s principal foreign policy objective is to retain as
much independence from Moscow as possible, given geopolitical reali-
ties. In line with this goal, Ceausescu has been trying to build a “special
relationship” with Washington as he believes that closer political and
economic ties will help Romania fend off pressures from the Soviets
for closer integration with the Warsaw Pact and CEMA. At the same
time, Ceausescu seeks to keep balanced relations with all of the major
powers, and his visit here next week is expected to be followed by a
trip to China later this spring. He probably also plans to go to Moscow
this year although apparently no date has been set.
12. Ceausescu recently named Stefan Andrei his new foreign minis-
ter, replacing the ailing George Macovescu. The appointment is not
likely to alter basic Romanian foreign policies. Andrei has been Ceau-
sescu’s personal foreign policy advisor for some years, and he is
expected to accompany him to Washington.
13. Ceausescu is anxious to retain his country’s active participation
in world affairs, but Romania’s recent foreign policy performance has
been unspectacular. Bucharest has been unsuccessful in making an
imprint on the CSCE proceedings and its suggestions were not reflected
in the final document. The Romanians probably would like to play a
leading role in the non-aligned movement, but are finding it difficult
even to put a foot in the door.
14. Ceausescu has a deserved reputation as a behind-the-scenes
arbitrator of international disputes and did help arrange the Sadat-

Romania
Begin meeting last winter. Although the recent Israeli action in Lebanon
was an embarrassing setback for Ceausescu’s efforts, he is apparently
continuing his conciliatory attempts in the Middle East. Ceausescu has
hinted that he will deliver a North Korean message to President Carter
and he has expressed an interest—apparently without the express
encouragement of either side—to improve relations between Washing-
ton and Peking. In sum, he relishes a role as mediator which, he believes,
gives him prestige as an international statesman.
15. As far as we are aware, Ceausescu is unconcerned that he might,
for whatever reason, leave the political scene and there is no clearcut
candidate to succeed him. [5 lines not declassified]
195.
Editorial Note
On April 5, 1978, Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs
George Vest, Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights and
Humanitarian Affairs Patricia Derian, and Director of Policy Planning
Anthony Lake forwarded an action memorandum to Deputy Secretary
of State Warren Christopher requesting decisions on a number of
human rights issues prior to the arrival of Romanian President Nicolae
Ceausescu. Sent through Counselor of the Department of State Matthew
Nimetz, the memorandum asked, among other issues, for a decision
on how to raise the sensitive case of Constantin Rauta’s request for
family reunification with Ceausescu’s party. (See Document 196.)
Constantin Rauta was part of the advance party preparing for
Romanian President Nicolae Ceausescu’s visit to Washington in
December 1973, when he defected to the United States. Rauta, a diplo-
matic courier at the time he defected, requested that the United States
facilitate his attempt to trade his classified pouch for permission for
his wife and young child to immigrate to the United States. U.S. officials
persuaded Rauta that such an attempt was impractical and that the
pouch should be returned to the Romanian Government. Ceausescu
considered Rauta’s defection a personal affront, and the Romanian
Government refused to allow Rauta’s family to emigrate.
The focus placed on human rights by the Carter administration
offered Rauta new traction. In telegram 196804 to Bucharest, August 18,
1977, the Department informed the Embassy of the increasing interest
in the Rauta case of Representatives Charles Vanik, Joshua Eilberg, Bill
Frenzel, as well as Senators Abraham Ribicoff, Henry Jackson, Paul
Sarbanes, Jacob Javits, and Edward Kennedy. (National Archives, RG

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
Humanitarian Affairs Bureau pressed for an official démarche on the
Rauta case. Romanian Ambassador to Washington Nicolae Nicolae,
told newly appointed U.S. Ambassador to Romania Rudolph Aggrey
upon his arrival in Bucharest, “as a friend and colleague” that, in
Nicolae’s opinion, the case was “heavily political here, that it is political
to the very highest level, and that he saw no possibility of securing a
reversal of the GOR’s stand.” Nicolae added that “any decision to
reunite this family will be considered a reward and encouragement to
others for treason, and will be taken only for the most pressing political
reasons, at the highest level.” (Telegram 9067 from Bucharest, Decem-
The Department of State continued to debate the issue internally.
Director of Eastern European Affairs in the Bureau of European Affairs,
informed the Embassy: “We have given very serious consideration to
Bucharest 9067. There have been conversations between us and Patt
Derian’s office, between George Vest and Patt Derian, and so forth.”
Andrews continued: “There is strong pressure from D/HA (and of
course Rauta) to do something now. Romania’s poor reputation in
human rights matters (beating up and detention of Goma, beating up
of Baptists, continuing American-Hungarian propaganda on Transyl-
vania, the ‘reprisals’ against the Jiu Valley miners, Goma’s statement
in Paris, etc.) is not made up for by its adequate emigration record
(especially to the US and FRG).” (National Archives, RG 59, Central
Foreign Policy File, D770479–0302) While Assistant Secretary of State
for European Affairs George Vest was “not overly optimistic about
the Romanian reaction” to a démarche, he considered that the case’s
“potential to prejudice the normal development of our relations with
Romania if left unresolved” made sending a note imperative. (Telegram
Central Foreign Policy File, D770484–0036) The démarche, which was
sent to Bucharest in telegram 2366, January 5, was discussed by Ambas-
sador Aggrey with Deputy Foreign Minister Cornel Pacoste on January
0162) Pacoste refused to accept the note, denied that Rauta was a
humanitarian case, and told the Ambassador that “he did not under-
stand U.S. persistence (“insistence”) in this case and was surprised that
U.S. Government is officially pressing for its solution.” (Telegram 109
from Bucharest, January 6; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
Policy File, D780010–1118)
As preparations for Ceausescu’s visit went forward, the Rauta case
was brought up repeatedly in all high-level discussions between U.S.

Romania
and GOR officials. Counselor of the Department of State Matthew
Nimetz discussed the issue on January 10 during his meeting with
Romanian Ambassador Nicolae. (Telegram 7567 to Bucharest, January
0020) Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights and Humanitarian
Affairs Patricia Derian raised the issue on February 14 with Ceausescu
adviser Vasile Pungan, suggesting that failure to resolve the matter
would force the U.S. Government to bring up the case during Ceauses-
cu’s visit. (Telegram 43849 to Bucharest, February 18; National
March, the Department concluded that pursuing the Rauta case on
humanitarian grounds was unlikely to succeed. “We are willing to
suggest to the right Romanian officials the possibility of a quid pro
quo for the release of the Rauta family,” the Department informed the
Embassy in telegram 79845, March 28. “We see no other way to break
the present stalemate” Deputy Assistant Secretary of State William
Luers wrote. Representative Charles Vanik’s visit to Bucharest on
March 31, Luers concluded, “offers a good opportunity to make the
first try. Vanik has shown a personal interest in the Rauta case. More
important, he has good bargaining chips, if he is willing to use them
in this way.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
D780135–0178) Vanik discussed the Rauta case with Romanian Foreign
Minister Stefan Andrei, without any success. (Telegram 2146 from
Bucharest, April 1; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
File, D780142–0921)
On April 4, Helen Thomas, UPI White House correspondent, asked
the President’s personal secretary, Susan Clough, to bring a letter from
the Holy Cross Romanian Orthodox Church to the President’s attention.
The letter asked the President to intervene on behalf of Rauta’s family
with the Romanian Government, “perhaps during the upcoming visit
of Romanian President Nicolai Ceausescu.” Carter forwarded the letter
to his Assistant for National Security Affairs, Zbigniew Brzezinski com-
menting “Zbig—I’d like to help.” (Carter Library, National Security
Affairs, Brzezinski Material, VIP Visit File, Box 12, Romania, President
ert King, of the National Security Council Staff, was instructed to
prepare, in cooperation with the Department of State, a paper for the
President’s use on the Rauta case. King responded to the memorandum
on April 7, detailing the Rauta case and the Romanian sensitivities, as
well as the numerous instances in which the case was discussed with
the Romanians. King wrote: “Bill Luers and I have discussed the prob-
lem and we agree” that the best U.S. Government strategy to get permis-
sion for the family to emigrate “is to offer to make some kind of
underhanded deal with the Romanians—to approve an exchange of

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
something the Romanians want in return for the exit visas.” King
continued: “If the President were to raise this specific case with Ceau-
sescu it would have serious repercussions and I strongly advise against
doing so.” King also recommended that Brzezinski advise the President
not to raise the Rauta issue with Ceausescu. Brzezinski disapproved
the recommendation. (Ibid.)
On April 10, King forwarded to Brzezinski a memorandum for
President Carter’s briefing book for the Ceausescu visit. The memoran-
dum recommended that the issue be raised late in the visit and that it be
raised in a tête-à-tête between Carter and Ceausescu. Most importantly,
“the best way to approach the issue is not on humanitarian grounds
and not by appealing to Ceausescu’s sense of justice” the memorandum
stated. Rather, the President should “explain that the Rauta case has
introduced discord in our relationship and express your desire that it
be resolved so that such obstacles do not stand in the way of the
further development of our relations.” (Ibid.) That same day, King also
informed Brzezinski that Deputy Secretary of State Warren Christopher
had approved a recommendation that Secretary Vance would raise the
Rauta case privately with Romanian Foreign Minister Stefan Andrei.
(See Document 196 and footnote 7 thereto.) Brzezinski signed King’s
memorandum on the Rauta case and sent it to Carter on April 11.

Romania
196.
Action Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State
for European Affairs (Vest), the Assistant Secretary of State
for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs (Derian), and
the Director of the Policy Planning Staff (Lake) to the
Deputy Secretary of State (Christopher)1
Washington, April 5, 1978
SUBJECT
The Ceausescu Visit—Human Rights Issues
ISSUES FOR DECISION
How three humanitarian issues should be taken up during Presi-
dent Ceausescu’s visit. Decisions are needed well before Ceausescu’s
arrival on April 11.
BACKGROUND
We agree that the President should raise the subject of human
rights with Ceausescu, making reference to obligations in the Helsinki
Final Act assumed by all signatory states to respect human rights and
discuss such matters with one another. The President should urge
Ceausescu directly to take favorable and prompt action on present and
future emigration and marriage requests including emigration to Israel,
particularly if Romania wishes the Administration to seek Romanian
MFN status from Congress on a multi-annual basis. Since human rights
problems are already an important item on our bilateral agenda, there
is disagreement within the Department over the degree to which and
whether the following three additional and sensitive human rights
issues should be raised with the Romanians during this visit.
THE THREE ISSUES
A. Hungarian Minority
The Romanian Government is periodically accused of officially
sanctioned discrimination against the approximately 1.7 million ethnic
Luers, Fuerth, and Wolf. Luers initialed the memorandum for Vest; Brody initialed for
Derian. The undated memorandum was sent under a covering memorandum through
Nimetz on April 5. In his memorandum, Nimetz recommended that Vance raise the
Hungarian minority issue with Andrei, that there was no need to raise the IFI issue,
and that the Rauta case not be brought up during the Ceausescu visit. (National Archives,
RG 59, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Mr. Matthew Nimetz, Counselor of the Department
of State, Under Secretary of State for Security Assistance, Science and Technology, January
Nimetz forwarded Christopher’s decisions to Vance under an April 10 covering memo-
randum. (Ibid.)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
Hungarians in Romania, such as restrictions on schooling in the
Hungarian language, employment discrimination, and strong efforts
to assimilate Hungarians into the Romanian culture. American-
Hungarian organizations are sensitive to this issue. Sixty-six Members
of Congress wrote to President Carter on March 22 stating their concern
and specifically asking that he raise the matter with Ceausescu.
Recent media attention has focused on detailed written criticism
of the official Romanian policy towards ethnic Hungarians. The author
was Karoly Kiraly, an ethnic Hungarian still in Romania who formerly
held a high position in the Romanian Communist Party.
For Romania, the Hungarian minority issue raises sensitive territo-
rial questions. Most ethnic Hungarians live in Transylvania which was
not incorporated into modern Romania until after World War I. Roman-
ian authorities fear that the real motivation behind the recent public
debate in Hungary over this issue is an irredentist attempt. They are
also concerned that the USSR may be stirring it up to pressure Romania
because of its independent foreign policy. It has assumed increasing
importance in Romanian-Hungarian relations since Ceausescu and
Kadar referred to it publicly for the first time in June 1977. It continues
to be discussed at high levels between the two governments. In a
speech March 16, Ceausescu criticized shortcomings and deficiencies
in Romanian policy toward the Hungarian and German minorities and
put forward specific remedial actions.
Department officials (Nimetz et al) have raised the issue with visit-
ing Romanian officials, most recently with Deputy Foreign Minister
Gliga on March 17.2 We put the issue in the context of our global
support for minority rights, reiterated our firm support for Romanian
territorial integrity, and made clear that we are not proposing specific
solutions but felt we had to raise the matter because of Administration,
public and Congressional interest in humanitarian matters set down
in the Helsinki Final Act.
Ceausescu may well preempt the issue by raising it with the Presi-
dent and explaining the situation as he sees it. If so, it would be an
opportunity for the President to express his satisfaction that the issue
has come up and to explain the concern which exists in the United
States in this regard.
OPTIONS
1. The President Raises Issue with Ceausescu
Should Ceausescu not raise the issue, the President on his own
would raise it to make clear at the highest level the seriousness with
which the U.S. views this aspect of human rights.
of the Nimetz-Gliga conversation on the treatment of the Hungarian minority in Romania.

Romania
In doing so he could note that the U.S. seeks a continuing official
dialogue on such questions rather than any U.S. involvement in Roma-
nia’s internal affairs. He could emphasize that if U.S. public debate on
this issue is erroneous or ill-informed, such debate is still a legitimate
consequence of the U.S. democratic process. The U.S. Government,
however, would be better informed as to allegations of discrimination
if there were a better bilateral discussion of the matter. (HA supports.)
2. The Secretary Raises Issue with the Foreign Minister
If the President has not raised the issue during his general discus-
sion of human rights and emigration issues with Ceausescu, he could
note his concern about certain delicate human rights problems and
indicate his wish that those be discussed at the Foreign Minister level.
If the issue is left for the Secretary, we would try to have the
Romanians raise it. In response to their presentation, the Secretary
would explain the interest which exists in the Administration, Congress
and the public domain for a fair and just solution to existing problems.
If the Romanians do not raise it, the Secretary could ask the Foreign
Minister to comment on the Hungarian minority issue as one of the
human rights issues embodied in the Helsinki Final Act. In either case,
he could stress that the U.S. strongly supports Romanian territorial
integrity, opposes irredentism, and has no wish to see this issue trou-
bling the relations among the United States, Romania and Hungary.
The Secretary’s approach would serve to bring strong U.S. interest
in this matter to Ceausescu’s attention. It would not fully address the
concerns of the Congressmen that the President raise the matter. (EUR
and S/P support, as does HA if the President does not raise it.)
3. Issue is not Raised by the President or Secretary
Choosing this option signifies recognition that the Romanians and
Hungarians have this issue on their agenda at a high level; that Ceause-
scu recently made recommendations to correct Romanian policy
toward minority problems; and that the United States has little or
nothing to gain from involving itself directly in an issue between two
Communist governments.
Recommendations:
1. That the President raise the issue with Ceausescu. (HA supports.)
2. That the Secretary raise the issue with the Foreign Minister. (EUR
and S/P support, as does HA if the President does not raise it.)3
3. That the issue not be raised by the President or Secretary.
President state that he has asked Secy of State to raise certain human rights matters. WC.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
B. Loans to Romania from International Financial Institutions
Recently, and in accordance with current legislative requirements,
we have advised Romanian officials of our obligation to take human
rights considerations into account in determining our position on loan
applications to international financial institutions (IFIs) like the World
Bank. However, we have not advised the Romanians that the U.S. is
contemplating specific negative action against them in the IFIs. It is
widely understood that Ceausescu maintains a tightly controlled inter-
nal political system. There is lack of consensus in the Department on
the degree to which there is a pattern of violations of human rights in
Romania serious enough to warrant such action.
The U.S. encouraged Romania to join the World Bank and the IMF,
in keeping with our interest in lessening Romania’s economic and
political dependence on the USSR and Communist economic organiza-
tions. This stems from Administration policy (in accordance with PD–
21) to make legitimate efforts to accord Romania favored treatment in,
among other things, economic matters. We are required by the Harkin
policies in the IFI context.
OPTIONS
1. The President Raises Issue with Ceausescu
This would signal the most serious intent to reflect upon the human
rights situation in Romania and our need to consider this in decisions
for positive votes, abstaining or voting against Romanian loan applica-
tions in the IFIs. The President could raise this issue in a calm fashion
without suggesting that the United States is on the verge of abstaining
or of a negative vote in the IFI and could make clear he has an open
rather than closed mind on the subject. (HA supports.)
2. Secretary Raises Issue with the Foreign Minister
This could be taken up as one of the “delicate problems” mentioned
by the President (see above). The Secretary could explain the require-
ments of U.S. law and stress our wish to continue supporting Romanian
IFI loan applications. (S/P supports, as does HA if the President does
not raise it.)
4 The Harkin Amendment to the Fair Trade Act prohibited the United States from
offering economic assistance to countries that grossly violated human rights.
observance of human rights would be a major objective of U.S. foreign policy.

Romania
3. Issue is not Raised by President or Secretary
This course would avoid difficulties in our relations and maintain
consistency with PL–21. The Romanians have already been informed
at a high level of U.S. legislative requirements. The U.S. has other
levers (for example, the MFN/emigration hearings) with which to exert
pressure on human rights issues. (EUR supports.)
Recommendations:
1. That the President briefly raise the issue with Ceausescu. (HA
supports.)
2. That the Secretary raise the issue with the Foreign Minister.
(S/P and HA support.)6
3. That the issue not be raised during the visit. (EUR supports.)
C. The Rauta Case
Constantin Rauta was a Romanian official with intelligence respon-
sibilities who defected just before Ceausescu’s official visit to the U.S.
in December 1973. Rauta is now an engineer at the Goddard Space
Flight Center. He was traveling as a diplomatic courier and asked U.S.
officials to help him trade his classified pouch for Romanian permission
for his wife and young son to join him in the United States. We con-
vinced him of the impracticality of such an exchange given the immi-
nent arrival of the Romanian President and the pouch was returned
unopened to the Romanians.
The principal Romanian objection to allowing Mrs. Rauta and the
child to emigrate is that the family’s reunification would be seen as a
reward to a traitor and would encourage similar defections. Ceausescu
is reportedly familiar with all the above aspects of the case, apparently
regards Rauta’s defection as a personal affront and is the only person
who can decide the fate of Rauta’s wife and child.
Our representation on humanitarian grounds have been stubbornly
rebuffed by Romanian officials who insist that because Rauta is a traitor,
this is not a human rights matter. They may maintain that our raising
it in this context only confuses matters. We do not accept that view
but are prepared to resolve this issue on any practical basis. Prospects
are not bright in the near future but we intend to persist.
OPTIONS
1. The President Raises the Issue with Ceausescu
This would signal the strongest interest in resolving this longstand-
ing case and our understanding that only Ceausescu holds the key to

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
unlocking this case. Raising the issue with Ceausescu could make him
uncomfortable and may not immediately secure the release of Rau-
ta’s family.
This would give the Romanian President an understanding of the
U.S. view that, three years after the granting of MFN, there should be
progress in even the most difficult of the divided family cases with
Romania. A number of longstanding cases will have been resolved in
the weeks before Ceausescu’s arrival here, clearly as a result of a
Romanian attempt to put its best face forward. Indications are that
there is little high-level Romanian receptivity to bargaining for the
Rauta family’s release. A high-level U.S. reaffirmation to Ceausescu
that the Rauta matter is a humanitarian issue which can be resolved
will maintain the momentum we have generated in pressing the case
with Romanian authorities. There has been no confirmation to us that
the Romanian President is even aware of our heightened concern for
the Rauta wife and child. (HA supports.)
2. Secretary Raises the Issue with the Foreign Minister
This course would also make clear very strong U.S. interest in
resolving this case, without producing a confrontation during the
Ceausescu visit. It could be taken up as one of the “delicate problems”
referred to by the President. (S/P support this option, as does HA, if
the issue is not raised by the President.)
3. Issue is not Raised by the President or Secretary
We have already raised this issue at high levels this year. Our
Ambassador raised it with Deputy Foreign Minister Pacoste in January
and delivered a note. We raised it with Presidential Counselor Pungan
in Washington. Just recently, on March 30, our Ambassador made a
strong pitch to Pungan to find some solution and Congressman Vanik
made an equally strong pitch to the Foreign Minister on April 1 at our
prodding. (EUR supports.)
Recommendations:
1. That the President confirm U.S. interest in the Rauta affair as
humanitarian and seek Ceausescu’s agreement to allow the wife and
child to join Mr. Rauta here. (HA supports.)
2. That the Secretary raise the issue with Andrei. (S/P supports,
as does HA, if the President does not raise.)7
3. That the issue not be raised. (EUR supports.)

Romania
197.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, April 11, 1978
SUBJECT
Visit of Romanian President Ceausescu
Romania has been singled out as one of the East European countries
in which we have a special interest. This stems largely from its foreign
policy. Since the early 1960s Romania has institutionalized a degree of
independence from the USSR that is unique in Eastern Europe.
Romanian autonomy from the Soviet Union is a disruptive factor
within the Warsaw Pact and it tends to increase Soviet uncertainty
about the protective glacis along its western frontier. Furthermore, the
institutionalization of Romanian autonomy increases the possibility
and provides a role model for other East European countries which
might seek to achieve similar status.
For the last fifteen years, the US has followed a policy of supporting
Romanian autonomy principally through political gestures. Romania
was the first communist country to be visited by an American president
(1969), and a number of high level visits have been exchanged. Ceause-
scu was last here in 1975.2
In 1975 we signed a Trade Agreement extending Most Favored
Nation Treatment to Romanian exports.3 While this did not bring a
substantial increase in trade (as the Romanians hoped it would), some
modest gains have been evident. More important, however, is the
symbolism of giving Romania a status in its trade with the US that the
USSR and most other countries of Eastern Europe have not achieved.
During the Nixon and Ford Administrations Romania was
accorded a favored place in our policy towards Eastern Europe. In the
reassessment of our East European policy last year, we have somewhat
altered that situation. On the basis of internal liberalization and/or
3 President Ford signed the Presidential Determination extending MFN to Romania

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
external independence from the Soviet Union, we placed Poland and
Hungary in a status equal to that of Romania.
Ceausescu’s main purpose in this visit is to secure a renewed US
endorsement of Romania’s foreign policy and to establish a personal
relationship with you. At present, however, there are few concrete
actions that we can or would wish to take that will reaffirm our interest
in Romania. In bilateral relations there are no outstanding important
issues that require solution. Ceausescu will probably request conces-
sionary credits, which we do not wish to grant. (Romania’s level of
development is advanced by third-world standards and granting such
credits would create an undesirable precedent.)
The best way in which we can reaffirm our interest in Romania
is through sharing with Ceausescu our views of the current major
international questions. If Ceausescu leaves feeling support for his
country and that you have taken him into your confidence on world
problems, the visit will be a success. Accordingly, you should particu-
larly discuss the following three questions with him:
1) The Middle East
2) The Soviet/Cuban role in Africa
3) China and Sino-Soviet Relations
The principal difficulty in our relations falls in the area of emigra-
tion and human rights. Generally the Romanian Government’s treat-
ment of its population remains among the most restrictive in Eastern
Europe. The most frequent justification for this is that in order to follow
an independent foreign policy, a strict internal regime is required. On
occasion the Soviets have attempted to foment internal disruption,
and this has reinforced the government’s determination to prevent
difficulties. Freedom of expression and movement are limited, as is
the right of emigration.
Since MFN was granted to Romania under Jackson-Vanik terms,
emigration to the US has gradually increased. In anticipation of Ceause-
scu’s visit, a number of family reunification cases were recently
resolved. The Romanians have been slow to grant approval, but they
have been willing to grant exit visas to individuals with family in the
United States. In fact, our emigration laws are such that some of those
permitted to leave have not been closely enough related to US residents
to come directly to the US.
Since MFN was granted in 1975, however, emigration to Israel has
3700.) In part this reflects the decline in the size of the Jewish population
and the fact that Jews remaining in Romania are an older age group.
The Romanian Government explains the decline on these grounds.

Romania
There are, however, important restrictive emigration procedures that
are a factor in discouraging Jews from applying for exit visas.
Jews seeking permission to emigrate must go through an elaborate
pre-application process that is used to discourage those wishing to
leave, and applications are frequently rejected at this stage with no
means of appeal. The Israeli Embassy in Bucharest becomes involved
only after a passport has been issued and permission to emigrate has
been granted. Since Israel’s political interests are considered more
important than the small number of Jews who might wish to emigrate
(Romania is the only communist country with which diplomatic ties
still exist), the Israeli Government has not been willing to stake a strong
stand on Jewish emigration with Romanian officials. This is why the
Jewish community counts on us.
We attach three memoranda that are germane:
1) Secretary Vance’s memorandum to you on the visit (Tab A).4
2) A paper on the case in which you expressed interest; you might
bring it up when talking to Ceausescu alone (Tab B).5
3) A memorandum from Arthur Goldberg, on Romanian perform-
ance in the human rights area. It basically points out that the record
is a mixed one (Tab C).6
4 See Document 198.
5 At Tab B is an April 11 memorandum from Brzezinski to Carter on the Rauta
case. See Document 195.
6 See Document 199.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
198.
Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance to President
Carter1
Washington, April 7, 1978
SUBJECT
Visit of Romanian President Ceausescu
I. OBJECTIVES
Our objectives will be:
—To reaffirm our support for Ceausescu’s efforts to ensure Roman-
ian independence;
—To urge more positive Romanian action on humanitarian prob-
lems such as divided families, binational marriages and Jewish emigra-
tion; more broadly, to encourage increased Romanian respect for
human rights;
—To encourage Romania to adopt more liberal domestic economic
and political arrangements;
—To recognize that Ceausescu is playing an active, constructive
and independent role in international affairs;
—To reassert the U.S. interest in fruitful relationships with the
communist countries in the Soviet Union’s European borderlands.
Ceausescu will be seeking:
—Assurance concerning the firmness and consistency of U.S. world
leadership;
—Reaffirmation of the importance the U.S. attaches to Romanian
independence from the Soviet Union, a vigorous bilateral relationship
with Romania, and an active Romanian role in world affairs; and
—Economic benefits from the U.S. to cement both the economic
and political relationship.
II. SETTING
Our bilateral relationship with Romania is advantageous for both
sides, but the approach of the post-Tito and post-Brezhnev period
provides the real setting for Ceausescu’s visit. This time of uncertainty,
with implications far beyond Europe, sets the agenda for Ceausescu’s
visit to Washington as it does for his visit to Peking in mid-May.
78. Secret.

Romania
Tito’s visit to Washington helped strengthen U.S.-Yugoslav rela-
tions for the post-Tito period. Like Tito, Ceausescu is an independ-
ent communist, a regional leader in the Balkans, a partner for the
United States and China in Eastern Europe, and a sometimes helpful
mediator in international transactions. At 60, Ceausescu has many good
years ahead of him. His visit therefore presents an opportunity to
reinforce an American role in Eastern Europe for the uncertain years
ahead.
In so doing, we will be building on a solid base. After a decade of
steady effort, our relations with Romania are good. Ceausescu is com-
ing to Washington ready and willing to keep them that way and to
move them further forward. He clearly aspires to as much of Tito’s
mantle as can be made to fit. The degree of recognition he gets from
us will be, for him, an important measure of his prospects. Because
recent activities in our relations with Yugoslavia, Poland and Hungary
may have led Ceausescu to question whether our attitude toward
Romania has cooled, he will be hypersensitive to the warmth and
protocol aspects of his reception here.
At the same time, Ceausescu is not easy to deal with for the United
States. Nurtured in the dangerous politics of the interwar communist
movement, he runs a unitary state and a tightly centralized economy
with a degree of direct personal control unmatched on the continent.
In this respect, his regime differs markedly from Tito’s. Relying heavily
on police power, the Romanian regime severely limits civil and political
liberties and discourages emigration. To obtain significant movement
on humanitarian problems—such as family reunification—normally
requires a combination of external pressure and economic inducement.
The country’s economic strategy continues to stress heavy indus-
trial development at the expense of the consumer, and to achieve it
through annual reinvestment of a third of Romania’s national income.
The results, in material terms, have been impressive. Romania has one
of the world’s highest growth rates and is an eager international trader.
The standard of living remains one of Europe’s lowest, but it continues
to rise, if slowly.
Nevertheless, there are signs that the limits of this “traditional
communist” type of development are being reached. A batch of eco-
nomic reform principles was announced in February, followed in
March by numerous personnel changes at the top. The two main
thrusts—more economic “self-management” and greater Party con-
trol—point in opposite directions. Ceausescu may begin to realize that
the economic efficiency Romania needs to maintain acceptable growth
rates and reasonable prospects of economic independence from the
USSR will soon require decentralized management and greater flexibil-
ity. He may fear, however, that a loosening of central control over the

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
economy might spill into the social and political arena. This he is clearly
determined for now to avoid.
Ceausescu’s claim to pursue an independent policy is well founded.
In 1968, he publicly condemned the Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslo-
vakia, thereby acquiring perhaps his greatest measure of personal pop-
ularity at home. He chose to maintain diplomatic relations with Israel
after the 1967 war when even Yugoslavia, following the Soviet lead
and Arab pressure, broke them off. And even more vigorously than
Tito, Ceausescu has pursued economic and political relations with most
of the world’s countries.
In substance, Ceausescu’s brand of foreign policy is the same as
Tito’s. Huddled across the Soviet Union’s land route to the Eastern
Mediterranean and the Adriatic, Romania and Yugoslavia are each
other’s most essential partners in foreign affairs. Both are intermittently
gripped by alternating fears of Yalta and the Cold War, of U.S.-Soviet
collusion and U.S.-Soviet collision.
Both countries therefore work for “participatory diplomacy” on a
global scale, for negotiations involving all states, great and small, in
peaceful settlement of disputes and especially in disarmament. They
are currently embarked, almost in tandem, on exchanges of high-level
visits with the U.S. and the PRC in recognition of the fact that the post-
Watergate and post-Mao period is over and that the preparation for
the post-Brezhnev period has begun in earnest. Their anxiety about
the direction the USSR might take after Brezhnev accounts for the
special efforts both have been making to shore up the bilateral and
multilateral framework of their independence in the European context.
At the very least, Ceausescu will come to Washington seeking
continuation of U.S. support for Romanian foreign policy independ-
ence, sovereignty, and territorial integrity, which has been consistent
through three Administrations. He will also bring a heavily economic
agenda, partly because Romania sees economic ties as a way of anchor-
ing political ties.2 However, his economic agenda also has a genuine
importance of its own in U.S.-Romanian relations, especially given his
drive to turn Romania into a more modern, competitive economy.
Ceausescu sees the U.S. as an enormously promising Western trading
partner, a rich source of modern technology, agricultural products,
industrial raw materials, as well as advanced management techniques.
There is bound to be a gap between what Ceausescu wants and
what we can give in the economic realm. He will be pressing for credits
at near-concessionary rates; multi-year most-favored-nation tariff sta-
tus (MFN); liberalization of U.S. export controls; and a stronger Admin-
2 Brzezinski highlighted the previous two sentences in the margin.

Romania
istration push to U.S.-Romanian economic cooperation. We are con-
strained in what we can do in all these areas, and we are bound by
law, as well as policy, to keep the mixed Romanian human rights
record in mind.
A full and candid review of major global issues, in a way that shows
Ceausescu that his country’s positions and interests are important to
us, will go a long way to substitute for our inability to meet his economic
desires. As much as any other aspect of the visit, our treatment of the
global agenda will determine the health of the U.S.-Romanian relation-
ship in the months and perhaps years to come. Ceausescu sees his
relations with us in a global perspective. The quality of U.S. foreign
policy leadership is a vital component in his own struggle, hard on
the Soviet border, to maintain Romanian independence.
III. KEY ISSUES
1. Trade and Emigration
U.S. Objectives: To encourage improved Romanian emigration per-
formance while expanding U.S.-Romanian trade.
Ceausescu’s Objectives: To obtain most-favored-nation tariff status
on a long-term basis without annual Congressional hearings, and to
obtain renewal of the three-year trade agreement.
Essential Factors: Romania obtained most-favored-nation tariff sta-
tus (MFN) and access to U.S. Government credits in 1975 under the
terms of the Jackson-Vanik Amendment, which links them to emigra-
tion performance and provides for annual Congressional hearings.
Although emigration to the U.S. has steadily improved, reaching about
1,250 last year, Romania discourages emigration and has erected cum-
bersome bureaucratic procedures to deter emigrants. A decline since
1976 in emigration to Israel has aroused concern here.
Two-way trade totalled just under $500 million in 1977, slightly in
our favor, and continues to grow. Both sides have generally endorsed
goal, we need the stability provided by MFN on a long-term basis. He
may also seek your commitment to renewal of the U.S.-Romanian Trade
Agreement, which expires August 3. However, Congress wishes to hold
hearings in May or June on both MFN extension and trade agreement
renewal. For the latter, a formal Presidential determination is also
required. There is no prospect in the immediate future of changing the
Jackson-Vanik Amendment to grant Romania MFN on a long-term
3 Brzezinski highlighted the first two sentences of this paragraph and wrote in the
margin “2X/3 yrs.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
basis, although improved Romanian emigration performance might
make this possible in the future.
Points to be Made: (President should raise)
—Assure Ceausescu that the Administration recognizes the impor-
tance of renewal of the trade agreement, which is vital to continued
expansion of our economic relations.
—Urge continued improvement in emigration to the U.S. and
express concern at the recent decline in emigration to Israel, noting
that the Administration and Congress are interested in both. Our two
governments must continue our dialogue on these questions.
—Explain that while we understand the advantages of longer-term
MFN status, we have concluded that it would be unwise to propose
legislative action to modify the Trade Act this year. However, it may
be possible in the future to work out a solution to accord MFN status
for a longer period.4
—Tell Ceausescu that prospects for long-term MFN would be
greatly improved by better emigration performance, particularly to
Israel.
2. Economic Relations
U.S. Objectives: To reassure Ceausescu that we are interested in
continuing to expand economic relations with Romania despite our
inability to move ahead as quickly as the Romanians desire in cer-
tain areas.5
Ceausescu’s Objectives: To obtain a Presidential commitment that
U.S. export controls will be relaxed; that Romania may receive conces-
sionary credits; and that the U.S. Government will take an active role
in establishing cooperative industrial projects between American firms
and Romanian enterprises.
Essential Factors: The U.S. has played an increasingly important role
in Romania’s attempt to reduce Soviet economic leverage on Romanian
actions. Since 1969 two-way trade has expanded by more than ten
times from a meagre base of about $40 million to almost $500 million
last year.6 Important stimulants to this expansion were the granting of
MFN tariff status to Romanian exports on August 3, 1975 and Roma-
nia’s inclusion in the U.S. scheme of generalized tariff preferences (GSP)
for developing countries, which has allowed duty-free entry of many
Romanian goods since January 1, 1976.
4 Brzezinski highlighted each of the first three points in the margin.
5 Brzezinski underlined “expand economic relations” in this paragraph.

Romania
a) Credits. Senior Romanian officials have recently indicated that
creation of a special American “financial facility” for Romania will be
one of Ceausescu’s major goals. They are seeking credits on easier
terms than those offered by either the Export-Import Bank or Commod-
ity Credit Corporation export credit programs, which have been used
extensively by the Romanians. The Romanians argue that as a develop-
ing country—and one so recognized by both the World Bank and the
United States—they are entitled to receive “soft” loans. We have
pointed out that concessionary credits, such as PL–480 loans, are
intended only for the very poorest LDC’s and not for middle-level
countries like Romania with a per capita GNP of $1450 (World Bank
estimate). Furthermore, under current U.S. legislation Romania is not
eligible for PL–480 loans. (Although the communist-country restiction
in the Foreign Assistance Act can be waived by Presidential action,
such a waiver must be “vital to the security of the U.S.”)
Points to be Made (if Ceausescu raises):
—Express our interest in expanding trade with Romania, as demon-
strated by the active export credit programs conducted by Exim Bank
and the Commodity Credit Corporation; express hope that Minister of
Machine Building Avram’s talks on April 11 with Exim Chairman
Moore and Ceausescu’s own discussions with Secretary Bergland will
lead to even more productive use of these programs.
—Although the United States has provided concessionary credits
to the poorest developing countries, Romania cannot be considered
eligible in light of its very impressive economic development.
—Recall that the provisions of U.S. law and the Administration’s
policy require us to review general questions of human rights in consid-
ering specific credit applications.
b) Export Control. The Romanians complain that our export con-
trols are a significant barrier to expanded trade, particularly in high-
technology fields such as computers and electronics. They are impatient
with the delays and stringent conditions on the export of equipment
and technology desired for cooperation projects with American firms,
and in particular for an existing joint venture with Control Data Corpo-
ration to manufacture computer peripherals.
Points to be Made (if Ceausescu raises):
—We are treating Romania as liberally as possible within the
restraints required by our export control legislation and our security
interests.
—Acting Secretary of Commerce Harman, with whom Ceausescu
will meet Wednesday afternoon, will provide more information on the
administration of our export controls.
c) Cooperation Projects. The Romanians have sought direct U.S. Gov-
ernment involvement in establishing cooperation projects with U.S.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
firms. Despite considerable facilitative assistance by the Department
of Commerce in locating appropriate American partners, there have
been few success stories. The reasons for this include: asymmetry of
economic systems; insufficient information from the potential Roman-
ian partner; Romanian toughness in business negotiations; and, most
importantly, skepticism by U.S. firms that the likely benefits warrant
the required investment of time, money and effort to put the deal
together. In an effort to wrap up some cooperation projects which
could be announced during the visit, the Romanian Minister of Machine
Building (Ioan Avram)7 and a host of other officials have been visiting
U.S. firms for the past week.
Points to be Made (if Ceausescu raises):
—As part of our policy to forge even closer economic ties with
Romania, we wish to see U.S. firms engage in mutually beneficial
cooperative projects with Romanian enterprises.
—Our government will continue to facilitate contacts with U.S.
companies wherever possible, but in our system there are limits to
what U.S. officials can do. It will be up to the Romanian side to convince
its potential American partner that the proposed cooperation project
is truly of mutual benefit.
3. Middle East
President Ceausescu will look forward to your assessment of the
present situation, including the prospects for Israeli-Egyptian negotia-
tions and for dealing with the Palestinian issue. He has recently been
in touch with Dayan and others and will want to give you his views.
4. US-Soviet Relations and Detente
U.S. Objectives: To give an overview of the present state of US-
Soviet relations, including SALT.
Ceausescu’s Objectives: He will be interested in your assessment of
the present state of US-Soviet relations (including the prospects for
SALT agreement) in the light of recent developments. He will be con-
cerned about a period of chill in US-Soviet relations and the implica-
tions of this for Soviet policies in Eastern Europe.
Essential Factors: Bucharest’s independent policies—which Ceause-
scu has been careful to keep within well-defined limits—are an irritant
which Moscow has learned to tolerate grudgingly, though not necessar-
ily to accept as a permanent or desirable state of affairs.
7 Brzezinski underlined the Minister’s name.

Romania
Points to be Made:
—Give Ceausescu our assessment of progress toward a SALT
agreement.8
—Review some of the points of disagreement between us and the
Soviets, and express our particular concern at the Soviet and Cuban
military presence in Ethiopia.9
—Make clear that in seeking good and stable relations with the
Soviet Union, we will not do so at the expense of the national interests
of any third country.
5. Global Human Rights
The Ceausescu visit affords you an opportunity to explain our
global human rights policy, including U.S. policies in the UN and other
international organizations.
Point to be Made:
—Discuss U.S. global human rights policy, explaining that it repre-
sents an essential aspect of U.S. values and diplomacy and is not
designed to interfere in the internal affairs of other nations.
6. CSCE
U.S. Objectives: To maintain close US-Romanian cooperation on
CSCE issues. In particular to encourage the Romanians to improve
their performance on human rights matters.
Ceausescu’s Objectives: To cultivate U.S. support for specific Roman-
ian objectives in the CSCE process, in particular in the military security
and economic fields. Ceausescu is likely to raise the issue.
Essential Factors: The Romanians have traditionally sought to use
CSCE to enhance all-European cooperation. Romania was disappointed
at the inconclusive results from the Belgrade meeting.10 Ceausescu will
be seeking U.S. support for highly visible means of demonstrating the
continued vitality of the CSCE process. We have sought to work closely
with the Romanians on CSCE issues, on the understanding that they
give serious consideration to our human rights concerns. This coopera-
tion has worked to our advantage both in CSCE and on bilateral issues.
8 Brzezinski underlined “SALT agreement.”
9 Brzezinski underlined “Soviet and Cuban military presence in Ethiopia.”
10 The Belgrade meeting of the CSCE was the initial follow-up meeting on the
and adjourned on March 8, 1978.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
Points to be Made:
—Note our belief that the Belgrade meeting at least provided a
firm basis for continuation of the CSCE process. Express satisfaction
with the close cooperation between the U.S. and Romanian sides.
—Ask Ceausescu how he believes the CSCE process should
develop in the period leading to the Madrid meeting.11 Note the impor-
tance of patient and persistent effort over the long term to ensure
concrete results.
—Point out that human rights issues require further scrutiny by
CSCE states. Express satisfaction that Ceausescu has been willing to
discuss human rights matters frankly and urge further progress in
Romanian human rights practices, including specific emigration cases,
under Basket 3.
7. US-China Relations
U.S. Objectives: To obtain Ceausescu’s insights into recent develop-
ments in Chinese relations.
Essential Factors: Since the late 1960’s, China has been an important
part of Ceausescu’s international balancing act. Ceausescu plans to
visit Peking in mid-May, and Hua Kuo-feng, who has not left China
since taking power, is expected to visit Bucharest later this year. The
Chinese understand the delicate game Ceausescu must play with the
USSR and are likely to moderate their attacks on the Soviets while
Ceausescu is in Peking.
We will want to be forthcoming in giving our views on US–PRC
relations but must assume that anything we say on China may reach
both the Chinese and the Soviets.12
Points to be Made:
—Note Ceausescu’s valuable role in helping the U.S. reestablish a
dialogue with Peking in 1970–1971 and that we will soon be visiting
Peking again. Express the hope that he will convey these points to the
leadership in Peking:
• You recognize the historic and strategic importance of our
relations with China. The goal of this Administration is normalization
within the framework of the Shangai Communique. (S)
• You agree with Premier Hua’s observation at the recently-
concluded National People’s Congress that the U.S. and China share
quite a few points in common in world affairs. You believe it is im-
11 The Madrid meeting of the CSCE was the second follow-up meeting on the
implementation of the Helsinki Accords; it opened on November 11, 1980, and adjourned
September 9, 1983.
12 Brzezinski highlighted this paragraph in the margin.

Romania
portant for us to have authoritative discussions with the Chinese at
the highest levels in order to consult about these matters of mutual
interest. (S)
• The current expanse of U.S.–PRC contacts in such fields as scien-
tific and technological exchanges, trade, and tourism helps create a
favorable environment for normalization. We hope to enhance these
dimensions of our relationship with China in the months ahead. (S)
• You seek an improvement in relations with China because it is
in our interest to do so. But, normalization is not directed against any
Third Country. We simply believe that China plays a positive role in
maintaining the global equilibrium, and we wish to consolidate our
relations with China to enhance the prospects of peace in Asia and
elsewhere. (S)
—What will be the agenda of Ceausescu’s discussions with the
Chinese? (S)13
—Whom does he expect his interlocutors to be? (S)
—How does he view the future evolution of Chinese foreign pol-
icy? (S)
8. Korea (If asked)
U.S. Objectives: To emphasize our desire for a reduction of tensions
on the Korean peninsula.
Ceausescu’s Objectives: To pass on the views of North Korean leaders
and to obtain our views as to the prospects for a negotiated settlement
of the Korean issue.
Essential Factors: A high-level North Korean official visited Bucha-
rest last month, and there is a good possibility that Kim Il-song has
asked Ceausescu to carry a message to Washington. If that is the case,
Ceausescu may offer to carry a reply back to Kim Il-song whom he
will probably visit in May in connection with his visit to the PRC.
Points to be Made:
—State our opposition to talks with North Korea in the absence
of the South, as Kim Il-song has urged for some time.
—Explain our view that a serious direct dialogue between North
and South Korea is necessary to bridge past hostilities and to move
toward the eventual goal of reunification.
—Note that those countries like Romania which wish to encourage
a reduction of tensions on the peninsula can contribute by developing
contacts of their own with both Koreas. (Romania currently shuns all
diplomatic and commercial contact with South Korea.)
13 Brzezinski highlighted this paragraph in the margin.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
9. North/South Economic Issues
U.S. Objectives: To assure President Ceausescu that the U.S. wel-
comes a continuation of a positive North/South dialogue and to urge
a constructive Romanian role.
Ceausescu’s Objectives: To convince the U.S. of the need for estab-
lishment of the New International Economic Order espoused by the
“Group of 77”; to persuade the U.S. to be more forthcoming on the
G–77’s proposals which they believe would promote the development
of the LDC’s like Romania; and to convince us that Romania is playing
a moderating role in the G–77.
Essential Factors: Romania is the only Soviet Bloc country that is a
member of the G–77.14 By strengthening Romania’s ties to the develop-
ing countries through active participation in the Group of 77, Ceausescu
has sought to limit his country’s dependence on the Soviet Union and
CEMA, and to balance its relationship with the West. Romania was
an early proponent of the New International Economic Order. It has
supported G–77 demands that the developed countries—East and
West—make concessions to the developing countries. Romania, how-
ever, has not played a leadership role in the G–77 generally or in
meetings on specific issues.
Points to be Made:
—Assure Ceausescu that the U.S. continues to be willing to discuss
any issue of the N/S dialogue so long as negotiations on specific issues
are confined to specialized forums relatively free of political debate.
—The U.S. looks forward to the ECE regional meeting of the UN
Conference on Science and Technology for development in Bucharest
this June and the World Conference on this subject in Vienna in 1979.
We hope, however, that they will not result in the creation of new
international bodies but will utilize existing UN institutions for any
proposed program of action.
—Express U.S. views on the appropriate role of the UN General
Assembly’s “Overview Committee.”
—(If raised by Ceausescu.) Explain the U.S. position on resumption
of negotiations on a Common Fund.
10. UN Special Session on Disarmament (SSOD)
U.S. Objectives: To assure Romania that we regard the UN role in
disarmament as important, and to note our belief that SSOD objectives
should be reached by consensus agreement.
14 Brzezinski underlined “only Soviet bloc country” and “the G–77” in this
paragraph.

Romania
Ceausescu’s Objectives: To express his support for the UN as a disar-
mament forum. He will probably raise this issue and may ask if you
plan to attend the SSOD.
Essential Factors: Representatives of the U.S. and Romania met in
Washington in mid-March to discuss preparations for the SSOD sched-
a larger role for non-nuclear states (e.g., Romania) in disarmament
discussions and hoped that the SSOD would give the UN a more
active role in disarmament. We agreed there could be improvements
in multilateral disarmament mechanisms but argued that there must
be a continuing and experienced disarmament negotiating body, and
that disarmament agreements must be based on consensus. Substan-
tively, the U.S. is actively engaged in reviewing policy issues for the
SSOD.
Points to be Made:
—The recent US-Romanian talks on the SSOD were candid, and
fruitful for the U.S. Despite some difference in the views of our two
countries, it is very important to achieve consensus agreement on the
final documents produced in the SSOD.
—(If asked): The U.S. has adopted a strong and positive approach
to the Special Session. We hope the meeting will generate broad agree-
ment on principles and priorities, and thus give an impetus to progress
on disarmament issues of pressing concern. We are conducting an
extensive review of a broad range of disarmament issues for the SSOD.
11. Africa
Particularly in view of your recent visits to Nigeria and Liberia,
Ceausescu will want to hear your views of developments on the conti-
nent, especially on movement toward majority rule in Southern Africa
and toward the peaceful settlement of the Ethiopia-Somalia dispute.
12. Hungarian Minority in Romania
Recently, 66 members of the Congress wrote you a letter expressing
their concern about Romanian treatment of the Hungarian minority
and requesting that you raise the issue with Ceausescu.15 We have
received an indication that Ceausescu may raise it himself because of
his fear of Hungarian irredentist aspirations and will seek to explain
Romanian policy toward minorities.
Points to be Made: (If Ceausescu raises)
—Express your satisfaction that the issue has come up and appreci-
ation for Ceausescu’s explanation.
15 Brzezinski highlighted this sentence in the margin. See Document 196.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
—Note the concern felt in the United States on this subject, in the
Administration, Congress and the Hungarian-American community.
Point out our readiness to engage in a frank dialogue on this and any
other human rights issues.
—Stress U.S. support for Romania’s independence and territorial
integrity.
199.
Memorandum From the Ambassador at Large (Goldberg) to
President Carter1
Washington, undated
SUBJECT
Visit of Romanian President Ceausescu
This memorandum, requested by the White House, is designed as
a talking paper, relating to CSCE and the Belgrade meeting, to supple-
ment the memorandum submitted by the Secretary of State to the
President.2
I. HUMAN RIGHTS
The Romanians at Belgrade were notably silent about the subject
of human rights and fundamental freedoms (Principle VII of the Final
Act). This is scarcely surprising in light of the fact that, although they
Goldberg memorandum to Brzezinski, King noted that Joyce Starr, the NSC Staff member
who handled human rights questions for White House Counsel Robert Lipschutz had
requested the memorandum, since the Department of State’s HA bureau was dissatisfied
with the coverage of human rights issues in Vance’s briefing memorandum. King
explained: “Starr was asked by HA to ask Goldberg for such a memo to circumvent the
State Department consensus.” King recommended against forwarding the memorandum
to Carter; Inderfurth concurred, adding “particularly since you are forwarding the Rauta
memo.” Brzezinski disapproved King’s recommendation. (Ibid.)
President specifically on human rights. The memorandum, summarizing the decisions
made by Christopher on April 8 (see Document 196), briefed the President on the
Hungarian minority issue in Romania, the Rauta case, and the Romanian loans from
the World Bank. Vance suggested that he raise these issues directly with Andrei, and
that Carter tell Ceausescu he had asked Vance to do so. (Carter Library, National Security
Affairs, Brzezinski Material, VIP Visit File, Box 12, Romania, President Ceausescu,

Romania
pursue a somewhat independent foreign policy, they are most repres-
sive at home. Their lack of respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms follows a Stalinist pattern.
Although acknowledging Romania’s independent stand on some
foreign policy issues, I, nevertheless, pointed out aspects of Romania’s
shortcomings with respect to human rights in the course of one of
my interventions at the Belgrade meeting. It is interesting that the
Romanians did not reply to this criticism. But it is also interesting to
note that at no point did they attempt to defend the manifold shortcom-
ings of the Soviet Union in the human rights area.
II. HUMAN CONTACTS & HUMANITARIAN PROVISIONS
With respect to the humanitarian provisions of the Final Act (Basket
III), Romania has a mixed record of compliance.
The Romanians have permitted substantial emigration (several
hundred thousands) of Jews from Romania since World War II. How-
ever, during the period of April 1977 to March 1978, emigrants declined
There are only 50,000 Jews remaining in Romania and the government
says those still there are largely old, infirm and unwilling to leave.
Jewish sources say that the decline is due to formidable bureaucratic
obstacles making it extremely difficult for Jews and, for that matter,
anyone else to emigrate.
The Chief Rabbi of Romania, Rabbi Rosen, asserts that Romanian
Jews are permitted a reasonable degree of freedom to exercise their
religious beliefs. Without in any way denigrating Rabbi Rosen, a distin-
guished clergyman and fine humanitarian, there is substantial evidence
to the contrary. The great exodus of Jews proves that there was and
is no future for them in Romania. Moreover, Baptists have provided
convincing documentation of religious persecution of a sweeping char-
acter, and the same is true of other Christian denominations.
A substantial Hungarian minority group likewise has publicized
through Western media large-scale ethnic repression. The principal
source for this information is surprisingly a prominent leader of the
Romanian Communist Party, albeit of Hungarian origin.
Romania has the highest unsettled number of binational marriage
cases with the U.S. of any country in Eastern Europe, even though
there has been some reduction in those outstanding during 1977 as
with the United States has improved somewhat in the last year (21%
increase over 1976), but Romanian procedures on emigration cases
generally have not improved as a result of CSCE.
I would believe it entirely appropriate that the President raise these
human rights issues with President Ceausescu, both on the merits and
in light of Romania’s professions of fidelity to the Helsinki Final Act.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
III. CBMs
As did many of the smaller nations at CSCE, the Romanians saw
in confidence building measures a means of enhancing their own secu-
rity vis-a-vis the larger powers surrounding them, particularly the
Soviet Union. The Romanians tabled a CBMs resolution which included
proposals for notification of major military movements, air and naval
maneuvers, banning of multinational maneuvers near borders, and
banning the establishment of new nuclear sites. The Romanians noted
to us in general terms that they were putting forward many CSCE
ideas as trial balloons.
They recognized that some of their proposals were the subject of
negotiation in other fora, the U.N. Special Session on Disarmament,
the Geneva and Vienna negotiations, SALT, etc. However, the Soviet
refusal after the New Year to discuss security issues other than in their
proposed “special joint consultations” which commanded no support,
made any discussion academic. The Romanians have made it clear that
the Soviets, and not the Allies, are to blame for any lack of progress
in the CBMs field. They also viewed the Allied CBMs resolution, which
emphasized improvement of the Helsinki CBMs, as evidence of an
Alliance commitment to moving forward in a realistic fashion.
If President Ceausescu raises CBMs, the President might assure
him of our continuing commitment to CBMs for the next CSCE Confer-
ence. I would caution, however, that the Romanians were in favor
of a post-Belgrade CBMs working group. We viewed that possibility
unfavorably as it would have institutionalized CSCE between the con-
ferences in a field where the Soviets would have made proposals useful
only for the propaganda value to them.
Further, our NATO Allies were also cool to the Romanian proposal.
To include provision for such a working group without equivalent
substance in other important areas, such as human rights, would pro-
duce a seriously unbalanced document. The U.S. pointed out that since
no agreement in principle had been achieved on any of the substantive
security measures discussed in Belgrade, there was no basis for work
by experts on CBM matters. It also warned that parcelling out work
to experts groups where substantive argument was stymied could
threaten the coherence of the CSCE process. In any event, as I have
mentioned, the Soviets denied consensus to the Romanian and similar
proposals offered by the Yugoslavs, Sweden and others.
IV. FOLLOW-UP
The Romanians argued vigorously for a firm commitment to ensure
perpetuity for the CSCE process (periodicity). Again, the Soviets denied
consensus. We were able to negotiate a satisfactory compromise incor-
porated in the concluding document. The next Belgrade-type meeting

Romania
will take place in Madrid in 1980. Also, the concluding document calls
for further meetings thereafter and reaffirms a unanimous commitment
to the CSCE process. The language would seem to meet Romanian
concerns about periodicity.
200.
Memorandum of Conversation1
SUBJECT
Summary of the President’s First Meeting with President Nicolae Ceausescu of
Romania
PARTICIPANTS
President Jimmy Carter
Cyrus Vance, Secretary of State
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
O. Rudolph Aggrey, Ambassador to Romania
George S. Vest, Assistant Secretary of State
Jerrold Schecter, NSC Staff Member
Robert R. King, NSC Staff Member
Mrs. Huffman, Interpreter
President of Romania, Nicolae Ceausescu
First Deputy Prime Minister, Gheorghe Oprea
Foreign Minister, Stefan Andrei
Presidential Counselor, Vasile Pungan
Minister of Machine Building Industry, Ion Avram
Ambassador to the United States, Nicolae M. Nicolae
Interpreter, Mr. Celac
Notetaker, Mr. Mateescu
The President welcomed President Ceausescu and suggested discus-
sing international issues first and bilateral issues during the second
meeting.
President Ceausescu expressed pleasure with the visit and hoped
that the talks would contribute to better relations between the two
countries. He invited President Carter to visit Romania.
Cabinet Room.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
The Middle East
The President suggested that the Middle East be discussed first
since Israeli Foreign Minister Dayan had just visited Bucharest and
both countries follow complementary policies on this issue. He men-
tioned that Romania played an important role in bringing about the
Sadat visit to Jerusalem,2 but since that visit the process has stalled
and there is a need to restore momentum.
The President said that there has been some progress in influencing
the views of Prime Minister Begin, but he is still not willing to accept
that Resolution 242 applies to the West Bank and Gaza. It is our view
that any Israeli settlements in these areas are contrary to international
law. Begin was asked to permit no settlements, but he was not willing
to accept this view. There is still a possibility for progress, but it will
be difficult. We will appreciate any help President Ceausescu can offer
in the weeks ahead. We have benefitted from the information and
assessments he has given and we welcome the Romanian views on
how we should proceed.
President Ceausescu also emphasized the importance of the Middle
East situation, approved the US role in the Sadat initiative, and agreed
that Israel has not fully responded. Begin’s interpretation of Resolution
242 is not accepted even by some political figures in Israel, a number
of whom Ceausescu has recently met.
At present, the first step must be to secure the speedy withdrawal
of Israeli troops from Lebanon in order to prevent further hostilities
and create conditions for direct Israeli-Egyptian talks to resume.
Ceausescu told this to Dayan, but the US should do more to encourage
proper Israeli action. Although he is personally opposed to the use of
pressure, in this case it is not detrimental and should be used.
The next step is for Israel and Egypt to work out a declaration of
principles. The Egyptian proposals are generally acceptable to Israel,
but agreement on formulations must be worked out. The US should
encourage both sides in this regard.
The Palestinian issue is perhaps the major obstacle to a settlement,
and progress must be made before the talks can be widened to include
tian President Anwar al-Sadat, Carter wrote in his diary: “Sadat described the sequence
of events since our last April meeting. He said he asked [President Nicolae] Ceausescu
of Romania if Begin was for a genuine peace, and if he was strong enough to implement
one. Ceausescu thought the answer to both questions was yes.” (Carter, White House
Diary, p. 169. Brackets are in the original.) William Quandt, the National Security Council
Staff member directly involved in the Middle East peace process, also recounted in his
memoirs Ceausescu’s role in assuring Sadat that Begin would “negotiate in good faith
with Egypt.” (Quandt, Camp David, p. 144)

Romania
Syria and Jordan. The Palestinians must be given an opportunity to
determine their fate. The Begin proposals on this issue are far from
acceptable.
Also related is the problem of the PLO. The Palestinians must
be represented in the negotiating process, and the PLO is the only
organization which can speak for the Palestinians. The Romanian Presi-
dent said that Dayan was not unyielding on recognizing the PLO. Just
before leaving Romania a representative of the PLO told Ceausescu of
the organization’s wish for direct talks with the US. Ceausescu feels
that the PLO is following a policy that will permit recognition of Israel’s
right to exist.
The present framework of the Egyptian-Israeli talks do not permit
the participation of Syria, Jordan, and the Palestinians, thus it would
be useful to consider convening a Geneva conference to permit wider
participation, including that of the USSR. Both Begin and Dayan have
indicated a willingness to consider that possibility.
The President said that there were certain differences of view with
the Romanian assessment. The US does not support complete Israeli
withdrawal since some border modification would be useful, and we
do not favor an independent Palestinian state. The US has long sought
to convince the PLO to renounce its committment to the destruction
of Israel and accept UN Resolution 242, but we have found no evidence
that the PLO is willing to modify its position.
Israel has put forward proposals on the West Bank that are inade-
quate. The next step is for Egypt to make a counter-proposal in order
to determine precisely where differences exist. We also feel that formu-
lations can be found to bridge the differences over the statement of
principles. We wish to encourage progress, but our influence over Israel
is overestimated.
The President asked Secretary Vance to comment on these issues.
The Secretary said that our experience has been that the Israelis are
much more rigid on the PLO question than Ceausescu indicated—
Begin in particular, but also Dayan. We fully agree that a way must
be found to widen the circle to include other states in direct negotiations
in order to achieve a comprehensive settlement. Agreement on a set
of general principles would be a first step in this direction.
The President said that US and Romanian goals in the Middle East
are the same—peace and Israeli withdrawal. We are not discouraged
since there is greater evidence of progress today than a year ago.
President Ceausescu reiterated his concern that a way be found for
the PLO to participate in the negotiating process. He also repeated the
assurances of PLO willingness to talk with the US.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
US-Soviet Relations
The President then reviewed US relations with the Soviet Union,
noting progress has been made. He expressed the hope that Secretary
Vance’s visit to Moscow this month and Foreign Minister Gromyko’s
later visit to Washington will lead to a summit meeting with Mr.
Brezhnev. Many past differences have been resolved in the SALT talks
but others remain, which we hope can be dealt with soon. In addition,
progress has been made on agreements to ban the testing of all nuclear
devices, limit the buildup of military forces in the Indian Ocean, prevent
the destruction of each other’s satellites, and control conventional arms
sales. The Soviets have negotiated in good faith, and we are pleased
with the progress thus far.
One important problem in US-Soviet relations is the Soviet intru-
sion into Angola and Ethiopia by means of Cuban soldiers. Soviet
actions in Africa have roused suspicion of Soviet intentions, thus diffi-
culties in the minds of Congress and the American People. We hope
the USSR will not become involved in Eritrea, but we will not permit
these differences to interfere with the SALT negotiations.
We look forward to Brezhnev’s visit here. No date has been set
thus far since the Soviet leader probably wants to be certain that an
agreement will be ready for signature. We hope this will not be delayed.
President Ceausescu said that he welcomed progress toward the
solution of problems between the US and the USSR, and the conclusion
of a SALT agreement will have a favorable influence on international
affairs. Other problems remain, however, which cannot be solved by
the superpowers alone. Relations between the US and the USSR must
not be achieved at the expense of other states, large or small.
Problems in the area of nuclear weapons, and in conventional
weapons as well, are not a matter for the US and USSR alone, though
they have the largest arms stockpiles. Other countries and groups of
countries (including the People’s Republic of China) are also increasing
their weapons and must therefore play a greater role in disarmament.
The President expressed the desire to discuss China, preparations
for the Madrid meeting, the Korean question and the Pacific at subse-
quent meetings. He appreciated the discussions. Copies of the Presi-
dent’s book Why Not the Best and a book of satellite photographs were
given to President Ceausescu, who expressed thanks.

Romania
201.
Memorandum of Conversation1
SUBJECT
Lunch with President of Romania
PARTICIPANTS
Cyrus R. Vance, Secretary of State
Zbigniew Brzezinski, National Security Adviser
Nicolae Ceausescu, President of Romania
SUMMARY. During lunch Secretary Vance and Dr. Brzezinski dis-
cussed with President Ceausescu the status of the North-South dialogue
and how most effectively to include the socialist countries, particularly
the Soviet Union, in that dialogue; the future leadership of the Soviet
Union and U.S. relations with China. In the latter discussion President
Ceausescu urged early normalization and indicated that China would
play a much more important role in world affairs. Secretary Vance
and Dr. Brzezinski explained the domestic situation and the need for
pursuing priorities in U.S. foreign policy. END SUMMARY.
Secretary Vance asked President Ceausescu his views on how to
proceed on the North-South dialogue. Ceausescu said that the current
situation does not hold much hope, that developing countries need to
play a larger role and the socialist countries in particular should be
more deeply involved. Secretary Vance agreed. Ceausescu said that
developing countries are not playing a sufficient role. He knows
because Romania is a developing country. He said that the United
Nations mechanism is good for discussion of North-South issues but
needs improvement. If we wish to overcome the present economic
crisis it is necessary that all countries work actively to improve not
only their production capacity but their satisfaction of consumer needs.
Secretary Vance observed that the most pressing item in the North-
South agenda is the establishment of the Common Fund because of its
symbolic and its substantive nature.
The Secretary then asked what the President would recommend
as ways of achieving greater participation from the socialist countries
in the North-South dialogue. President Ceausescu said that the socialist
countries, particularly the Soviet Union, have underestimated the prob-
Exdis. Drafted by Luers; approved in S/S on April 19. The meeting took place in the
Madison Room at the Department of State.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
lems of the developing countries. Romania has had many debates with
the Soviets on this point. The Soviets see it as a heritage of colonialism
and not a problem of development. There is some validity to the Soviet
position but it is his view that the Soviet Union will eventually play
a more active role on the North-South problems. Secretary Vance asked
how this could be achieved. Ceausescu replied that when these matters
are discussed by the United Nations it is a helpful way to involve
the Soviets and socialist countries. Secondly, when the developing
countries play a more substantial role in the development of concrete
programs and initiatives, the socialist countries will be put in a situation
in which they must respond.
Secretary Vance said that he thought that the United Nations
should be used to stimulate socialist country participation and he
thought perhaps the capital “Overview Committee”2 would be a good
vehicle. He believed that if the developing countries were to press the
Soviets and other socialist countries into a more constructive role, it
would be more acceptable to the Soviets than if the United States
were to do so, since the Soviets could consider our efforts a source of
confrontation.
Ceausescu replied that the developing countries want to keep the
issue in the United Nations and it would be desirable for the developed
countries to support developing countries’ initiatives. The developing
countries need help from the developed countries, particularly in mod-
ern technologies but they need also to work more effectively among
themselves. Ceausescu then said the United States for its part will have
to look to world needs. General Motors, for example, can no longer
expand production for American consumers but must project its techni-
cal and production capacity to finance world needs.
Soviet Leadership—Dr. Brzezinski then asked the President for his
estimate of the younger leaders around Brezhnev and what policies
they might follow. Ceausescu replied in gest that he did not see many
young people around Brezhnev. Then he added, more seriously, that
there are some relatively younger people who will have to play a role
but it was difficult to talk about individuals. Dr. Brzezinski asked the
President who had struck him as particularly effective in the second
rank in the Soviet leadership. President Ceausescu repeated that it was
hard for him to talk about individuals. He asked, rhetorically, who
could have predicted five years ago that Hua would become the leader
of China. Dr. Brzezinski said, of course, no one can predict but the
establishing a Committee of the Whole—the “Overview Committee”—with the mandate
to look at the world economic situation as a whole, and to review and encourage progress
being made elsewhere in the North-South dialogue.

Romania
question is will the next leadership in the USSR look to widening
cooperation with the West or will it become more nationalistic and
expansionist. This is a very important question that does not relate just
to personalities. President Ceausescu expressed his conviction that the
general trend in the world is toward cooperation and toward raising
living standards. No leadership, he added, can ignore the aspirations
of the large masses of its people to satisfy their needs.
China—Secretary Vance asked whether the President believed
China was prepared to play a more constructive role in the world. He
said the Chinese had told him when he was visiting there that they
would have to be very sparing in their role in Third World develop-
ment. President Ceausescu replied that one should realize that China
has its own problems. It is one third of the world and has limited
capacity to help those beyond its borders. Yet, he added, China will
play an increasingly important role in world affairs.
Secretary Vance agreed saying that he hopes they will also play a
more active role in the United Nations where they have at times
appeared to withdraw from debates. Dr. Brzezinski said that the
Chinese have displayed in their history periods of withdrawal and
rejection of the world and other periods of projection and deep involve-
ment. Hua’s recent speech implies a broadly gauged ambition to a
development program based on technological development which sug-
gests a much greater and a long-term Chinese involvement in the world.
Ceausescu replied that China’s present plans will lead it to become
a very powerful country. As to Chinese reservations expressed in the
U.N., the United States must realize that the Chinese cannot accept a
certain degree of “dictat” within that body. Also it is not by chance
that Chinese recently signed an agreement with the European Commu-
nity to insure an adequate flow of modern technology since it was
unable to get the assurances from other quarters. On that note, President
Ceausescu urged that the United States move toward complete normal-
ization of relations with China.
Secretary Vance said that President Carter and the United States
are committed to complete normalization of relations with China on
the basis of the Shanghai communique. Ceausescu said that a long
time has elapsed since that communique. Secretary Vance agreed. He
said that action must be taken in the not too distant future but the
timing must take into consideration the other pressing matters currently
on our platter in foreign relations. Ceausescu said that the decisive
role in normalization rests with the United States and some of these
problems should not be solved at the expense of others.
Secretary Vance said that the first item on our agenda is Panama,
both because of our relations with Panama and because of our relations
with the entire developing world. Ceausescu replied that he thought

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
the treaty was very important but it should not prevent the United
States from tackling important problems such as those of the Far East
and China. In fact, approaching these together would be complemen-
tary.
Secretary Vance agreed but said the United States has many things
before it such as the numerous problems of Southern Africa, SALT
negotiations with the Soviet Union and the whole situation of economic
issues including the multilateral trade negotiations. He said one of the
criticisms of the President is that we are trying to do too many things
at once. President Ceausescu said he had no intention of entering into
a criticism of the United States domestic affairs. Dr. Brzezinski replied
that a unique form of American hospitality is to invite criticism.
Dr. Brzezinski then said that in relation to China, Soviet relations
with China are good in form and bad in substance, while U.S. relations
with China are good in substance and bad in form. Dr. Brzezinski said
that he prefers the United States’ approach to relations with China.
Ceausescu said that this may be true but it should not stop the U.S.
from solving problems. He cited a well known Romanian proverb (sic!)
that “one should never put off for tomorrow what one can do today”.
He added that the favorable conditions of today can also be lost tomor-
row. Dr. Brzezinski said that normalization with China in of itself is
not enough but we must seek a wide communality of interests which
are more important and which we are at the present time trying to
establish. Ceausescu replied that there is already an area of common
interest. Dr. Brezezinski replied that there was indeed such an area and
it is the same common interest that we have with Romania. Ceausescu
repeated that these problems should not impede normalization with
China.
Dr. Brzezinski said that the problem is fundamentally domestic.
Elements particularly in the Republican Party are worried about any
decisions affecting the future of Taiwan. President Ceausescu said that
the Republican Party could hardly be blamed for the present situation
with regard to our relations with China. He said Americans will not
oppose but most surely support a policy directed toward wider cooper-
ation with China. He speculated that, for the Democratic Party, normal-
ization of relations with China would in the long run be positive not
negative. Secretary Vance said he agreed. Dr. Brzezinski said he agreed
also as long as we get Panama, SALT and the energy program out of
the way first. Secretary Vance stressed that normalization does not
have to be put off indefinitely.
Concluding Toasts—Secretary Vance said that he was deeply hon-
ored to have President Ceausescu in the Department of State again.
He looked forward to meeting with the Foreign Minister and other

Romania
ministers.3 He said that President Ceausescu had commented that
our relations have made good progress and that we should now
work on broader issues to seek wider cooperation. Secretary Vance
agreed with this and said we will continue to benefit greatly from
President Ceausescu’s advice and leadership. He looked forward to
working with President Ceausescu in the months and years ahead.
President Ceausescu replied that he was pleased to be for the third
time having lunch in this same room in the Department of State and
to be here at this time with Secretary Vance. He welcomed the opportu-
nity to exchange with Secretary Vance views on some critical matters.
President Ceausescu said that Romania attached particular importance
to its relations with the United States and will do everything within
its power to move forward on the basis of the principles which he has
enunciated. He said events of the past year have included some complex
problems and these call for even broader cooperation by large and
small countries alike and that the middle and small size nations have
an important role to play. He said that he hoped that relations, already
well expanded with the United States, could develop further and he
hoped that Secretary Vance, Dr. Brzezinski and their colleagues would
collaborate to achieving this end. He expressed his thanks to Secretary
Vance for making him and his colleagues feel at home and called for
good cooperation.
3 Vance met with Foreign Minister Stefan Andrei following the lunch with Ceau-
sescu. See Document 202 and footnote 2 thereto. A summary of the meeting was sent

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
202.
Memorandum From Robert King of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, April 12, 1978
SUBJECT
Bilateral Meetings with Romanian Officials Today
At the Vance/Andrei meeting today,2 the following issues were
raised:
1. MFN—Andrei expressed concern about annual renewal of the
Jackson-Vanik waver. Vance said that no change in the Trade Act is
possible this year, but revisions may be possible later.
2. Emigration—Romania’s record on emigration to the US and to
Israel was discussed at considerable length, with Vance emphasizing
the link with MFN. Andrei responded with enthusiasm (the only case
of animation that I saw today) in explaining Romania’s policy. The
major problem was Jewish emigration, and Andrei reaffirmed his coun-
try’s willingness to deal with the issue constructively. The discussion
of emigration took up a third to half of the Vance-Andrei meeting. The
issue was thoroughly discussed and more treatment of it is unnecessary.
A list of outstanding cases of emigration to the US was given Andrei.
3. Export Controls—Andrei expressed concern that licensing agree-
ments require long periods for approval and are frequently turned
down. Vance agreed to expedite the issuing of decisions.
4. Credits—the Romanians expressed appreciation for our willing-
ness to make available larger credits through the Ex-Im Bank, but
expressed interest in concessionary terms. Vance indicated that we
could not grant such credits because of Romania’s advanced level of
development, but he agreed to look into the possibility of such credits.
5. The Rauta Case—Vance met privately with Andrei following the
general meeting. His intention was to raise the Rauta case, and I assume
2 The memorandum of conversation was sent to Bucharest on April 18 in telegram
98602. (National Archives, RG 59, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Office of Analysis
Box 2, Romania—Ceausescu Visit)

Romania
it was discussed. He did not plan to raise other issues. I hope to confirm
tonight that Rauta was raised.3
The meetings with Ceausescu (Blumenthal, Bergland and Sid Harmon
of Commerce) were largely uneventful. Bergland did a good job of
explaining our global policy on agriculture but Ceausescu indicated
his interest in self-sufficiency and importing US agricultural technology
rather than products. Blumenthal’s meeting was a non-event. Harmon
expressed the desire for increased trade and cooperation and was apolo-
getic for our export controls and inability to grant multi-year MFN.
Bilateral issues that should be raised tomorrow. The major issue that
has not come up yet is our global policy on human rights. The President
should raise this, although the emigration issue has been covered and
further discussion of it is unnecessary.4
3 No substantive record of the conversation between Vance and Andrei on the
Rauta issue was found. Telegram 96030 to Bucharest, April 14, confirms that a private
meeting took place and that “the subject, according to a note from the Secretary to
Assistant Secretary Vest, was the Rauta case.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
in the Vance-Andrei meeting, Clifford Brody reported that “King, consistent with his
view that the Rauta affair not figure in the visit at all, asked me to ask you not to raise
the case in the meeting.” He continued that “King has not been helpful in transmitting
our concerns till now” and that “everyone feels Vance does not know the Rauta details well-
enough to advocate its solution effectively.” (National Archives, RG 59, Bureau of Human
Rights and Humanitarian Affairs, Chron and Official Records of the Assistant Secretary
4 President Carter raised the issue of emigration briefly in his private meeting with
President Ceausescu. See Document 203.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
203.
Memorandum of Conversation1
SUBJECT
Summary of the President’s Private Meeting with President Nicolae Ceausescu
of Romania
PARTICIPANTS
President Jimmy Carter
President of Romania, Nicolae Ceausescu
Mr. Celac, Interpreter
(Note: This summary is based on the Romanian notes. The Presi-
dent’s remarks were translated into Romanian and then translated back
into English.)
The President said he would like to have a few minutes to talk
privately on any matters that President Ceausescu would like to raise.
Relations between our countries are very good and we have established
good rapport personally. Before the larger talks, it might be useful to
exchange views on matters of special interest.
President Ceausescu reiterated his appreciation for the progress in
relations between the two countries and expressed satisfaction with
the visit and talks thus far. He agreed that a good personal relationship
has been established and expressed the hope that it will continue. He
noted that the two have communicated previously through special
channels and he felt that it would be useful to continue such contacts
in addition to those through the two embassies when problems arise
in the future.
The President agreed, suggesting that they might exchange personal
letters without waiting for a crisis or special problems.
MFN and Emigration
President Ceausescu agreed. He mentioned his meeting that morn-
ing with a group of US Senators at which the question of MFN was
raised. They came to the conclusion that some improvements could be
made in the process by which annual renewal of MFN is handled
which would not require that the matter be raised before Congress
each year. A more permanent solution can possibly be worked out later.
Brzezinski forwarded the memorandum of conversation to Vance on April 18. (Depart-
ment of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Cyrus R. Vance, Secretary of State—1977–

Romania
The President said that this problem was also of concern to him,
but change in legislation would be necessary in order to extend MFN
for more than one year. This law was directed particularly against
Soviet restrictions on Jewish emigration. (He noted that in the past 4
or 5 months emigration of Jews from the USSR was double the figure for
the previous period.) Since the law was not directed against Romania
he hoped that Congress would be forthcoming in granting a new annual
extention for Romania. It would be better to do this on a longer-term
basis. There will be no problem of continuing MFN for Romania under
existing legislation, however, if the Congress and I feel that the human
rights situation in Romania gives no cause for concern. We have no
intention to interfere in Romania’s internal affairs, but we recognize
that there is a strong interest in this country in family reunification
and Jewish emigration which applies to countries seeking MFN. He
asked President Ceausescu to inform him if this created particular
difficulties.
President Ceausescu said that in practical terms there is no problem
with Jews leaving Romania. There are close contacts with the Israeli
government and it no longer considers this to be a problem. One cannot
speak of a “family reunification” problem since the war has been over
for some time and few cases exist of families separated by war. The
question is more one of mixed marriages, and such cases generally
receive favorable resolution. The wishes of the parents and other factors
occasionally make it impossible to grant permission, however. Perhaps
an interim solution to the MFN problem would be to have committee
discussion but avoid debates in the plenary sessions of Congress. It
appears that the sponsor of the Jackson-Vanik Amendment is also
thinking along this line.2
The President said it is the desire of this administration to continue
MFN for Romania and to enhance trade. If in any private communica-
tions you wish to provide information that will help in this regard, it
will be used for your country’s benefit. As in the past I will do every-
thing I can to inform the Congressional leaders of the good attitude
taken by Romania in order to continue receiving MFN treatment. I
believe that it is in our mutual interest to increase trade.
2 Vanik met with Ceausescu during his one-day stop in Bucharest, March 31. In
telegram 2148 from Bucharest, April 1, the Embassy reported that Vanik told Ceausescu
that “1978 was campaign year and 1979 would provide better opportunity to institute
different review process for Romania’s MFN renewal.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central
reported Vanik’s conversation with Andrei, in which the Representative said that “single-
year renewal essential this year because there is no time to change procedures, especially
in election year, but he hoped change in law permitting committee decision on better
handling of renewal would be possible next year.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central
Foreign Policy File, D780143–0268)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
Africa
The President expressed concern about the increased use of military
force and of Cuban forces by the USSR in Africa.
President Ceausescu said that Romania has frequently spoken out
against foreign troops on the territory of any independent state. We
do not at all welcome the presence of Cuban troops in Africa, although
formally it was requested by the respective governments. It would be
much better if they were not there.
China
The President expressed interest in President Ceausescu’s forthcom-
ing meetings with the Chinese leaders. We would like to see our
relations with China normalized. Our exchange of information through
our liaison office has been adequate, but we wish to improve our
relations.
It might be useful if, with Chinese knowledge, you could send me
a private letter after your visit and with your views about further steps
we might take to improve relations with China. We need your good
offices in improving that relationship.
President Ceausescu said that the normalization of US-Chinese
relations is proceeding with some difficulty. It might be good to think
of giving a fresh impetus to the process of normalization through
establishing full diplomatic relations. This will require a solution to
the Taiwan question by putting into practice something the US has
already done, i.e., recognizing Taiwan as an integral part of China and
therefore a matter for China alone to resolve. Considering the rapid
rate of change in international affairs, it may be of special importance
to have diplomatic relations with China. China plays and is bound to
play an increasingly important role in international life, to say nothing
of China’s economic potential which would give the United States great
opportunities.
The President said that the major obstacle is the Mutual Defense
Treaty with the Republic of China, and the People’s Republic has not
been prepared to state that the dispute over Taiwan is to be resolved
solely by peaceful means. If we could find a solution to that problem,
we could take rapid action in our relations with China. The Chinese
leaders share our wish to see this problem solved, and if that can be
done, we shall recognize the PRC.
President Ceausescu said the Chinese leaders have stated on more
than one occasion that they seek a peaceful resolution to the Taiwan
problem and I think that is their intention. If the US withdraws there
will be no need to resort to force, considering the close ties between
the people of Taiwan and China. Giving a specific commitment to the
US, however, would be difficult. It was apparent in my talks with

Romania
the Senators this morning that the US itself is reluctant to give such
guarantees on similar matters that regard it directly. The same is true
with China. Thus things should be resolved without creating additional
artificial problems in order to achieve normalization.
The President said it is our policy to work toward normalization,
and we shall do so.
President Ceausescu asked if he should inform Chairman Hua of
the substance of our talks on these matters. I will certainly inform you
of his views and how the Chinese leaders see future developments.3 I
think, however, it is urgent to resolve these problems, and you are in
a position to bring about their speedy solution.
The President said that we desire to do this. We do not try to use
our relationship with the USSR against China, nor vice-versa. We wish
to be friends with both countries, and this is a course that Romania
has followed so well.
President Ceausescu said that this is a wise course. He said that
continuing the present state of affairs generates a certain degree of
suspicion with the Chinese leaders. Thus more expeditious steps
toward normal relations would demonstrate a willingness to carry out
that policy.
Korea
President Ceausescu then raised the People’s Democratic Republic
of Korea and Korea in general. During my visit to the Far East I will
also visit the PDRK as well as Vietnam, Campuchea, and Laos. Our
relations with North Korea are very good and I personally have a
friendly relationship with President Kim Il-song. He asked me to con-
vey to you some of his thoughts with regard to a resolution of the
Korean problem. They wish to reach a state of improved relations with
the US on the basis of your commitment to withdraw American troops
from South Korea. They believe that initiation of direct talks on that
problem would be most useful. They have given assurances that they
will consider US interests in South Korea, and they envisage that reuni-
3 Andrei met with Ambassador Aggrey at the Foreign Ministry on June 12 to
brief him on Ceausescu’s Asia trip. Andrei asked Aggrey that “account be held in full
confidence and not discussed with other Bucharest diplomats” and “noted with a smile”
that he would meet with the Soviet Ambassador following his presentation to Aggrey.
Aggrey added: “I did not ask whether he would receive same briefing, but I doubt it.”
Aggrey reported that, based on the Romanian account, the visits to China, North Korea,
and Cambodia were successful although the visit to Vietnam and Laos less so. (Telegram

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
fication would take the form of a federation which would maintain
the existing social system in the two parts of the peninsula.4
In Kim Il-song’s opinion the main obstacle is President Park Chung
Hee. The North Koreans characterize his regime as Fascist and its
policies are clearly pro-Japanese. They would agree to deal with any
other president in the south that is agreeable to the US such as Yan
Bo-sim (a former President of South Korea, 1960–1962) whom they
know to have good relations with the United States. Yan Bo-sim is no
communist, and he is presently counselor of the New Democracy Party
in the South. Of course, that is only an example, but any personality
willing to promote a more democratic regime in the South who would
also be agreeable to the US will be acceptable for the North.
I present all of this to you in order to give you a picture of how
Kim Il-song sees a way to solve the existing problems and open the
way to new relations with that part of the world.
The President said it is not my responsibility nor that of Kim Il-
song to determine who shall be president of South Korea. That is a
decision for the people there, and they have elected President Park in
free elections. Will Kim Il-song have a direct meeting with representa-
tives of the US, North Korea, and President Park?
President Ceausescu answered that they will not deal with President
Park for the reasons mentioned. Regarding the democratic elections in
South Korea, I have been told that the other candidates for the presi-
dency were arrested and were not even able to run for office. The
North Koreans believe that if the US no longer supports Park, internal
forces in South Korea will be able to resolve the problem in a democratic
way. Nevertheless, the North Koreans are ready to talk with the US,
and they will talk with any democratically chosen leader after Park
has been replaced.
The President replied that North Korea has historically taken that
position. The possibility that President Park might be overthrown or
changed is very slight. We do not interfere in South Korea’s domestic
affairs and we will not change the government by force or intervention.
Unless Kim Il-song is willing to meet with representatives of the current
thank Andrei for the report on Ceausescu’s trip to Asia, and to brief him on the conclusions
of Brzezinski’s trip to China. Regarding Korea, the Department suggested that “the
Romanians, rather than taking a neutral position, are largely seeking to advance North
Korean position. For that reason we see little to be gained from entering into a detailed
dialogue with them on the subject.” The telegram instructed Aggrey to tell Andrei that
“if the GOR is interested in promoting improved relations between North and South
Korea, it may wish to make its views known through direct contacts with the Republic
of Korea as it already does with the DPRK.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
Policy File, D780266–0541)

Romania
government there will be no opportunity for such a meeting; the US
will not meet representatives of the North without representatives from
the South.
President Ceausescu said that since the US has relations with South
Korea it would be wise to also have direct contacts with the North.
The President replied that we are there on the basis of a UN resolu-
tion. We favor reunification of Korea and military representatives have
been meeting at the 38th parallel, but the US is not the dominant
political factor there. We are there to keep a fragile peace and we cannot
claim the political leadership of South Korea. To undertake political
negotiations with North Korean leaders in the absence of President
Park would be to assume a false posture.
The PLO
President Ceausescu then turned the conversation again to a possible
meeting of US and PLO representatives. Although this is not now on
the agenda, it is important if a new impetus is to be given to the peace
process in the Middle East. They will meet with the US either secretly
or publicly. I have been specifically assured that the PLO has already
mustered a majority within its organization to support such a useful
meeting.
The President recalled that he had stated the US position in talks
the previous day,5 but indicated his willingness to exchange ideas as
the situation develops. Our current desire is for Egypt to propose a
new solution and then have Egypt and Israel work together in resolving
their differences. At this stage the insertion of the PLO into the process
would be a complicating factor. Perhaps later it would be more
reasonable.
President Ceausescu said he was not referring to PLO participation
in general, but only to its participation in talks on the Palestinian
question.
The President felt that Egypt would not be willing to have the PLO
involved even on that problem at present, and Israel certainly would
not. King Hussein would probably take the same view.
President Ceausescu suggested that President Sadat wishes the PLO
to participate in the discussion of the Palestinian problem but not the
discussion of Egypt’s problems. He felt that Hussein is of the same
opinion; so is President Assad.
The President agreed that Assad may hold that view, but not
Hussein.
5 See Document 200.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
204.
Memorandum of Conversation1
SUBJECT
Summary of the President’s Second Meeting with President Nicolae Ceausescu
of Romania
PARTICIPANTS
President Jimmy Carter
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
O. Rudolph Aggrey, Ambassador to Romania
George S. Vest, Assistant Secretary of State
Jerrold Schecter, NSC Staff Member
Herbert J. Hansell, Legal Adviser to the Department of State
Robert R. King, NSC Staff Member (Notetaker)
Mrs. Huffman, Interpreter
President of Romania, Nicolae Ceausescu
First Deputy Prime Minister, Gheorghe Oprea
Foreign Minister, Stefan Andrei
Presidential Counselor, Vasile Pungan
Minister of Machine Building Industry, Ion Avram
Ambassador to the United States, Nicolae M. Nicolae
Mr. Celac, Interpreter
Mr. Mateescu, Notetaker
The President was pleased with the private discussions with Presi-
dent Ceausescu just prior to this meeting. He briefly summarized some
of the matters that had been raised: He will propose renewal of MFN
for Romania, and though it cannot be granted for more than one year
at a time, we will seek to minimize public discussion; the two presidents
will inform each other of the results of their international visits without
violating the confidence of other states (Ceausescu’s forthcoming visits
to China and Korea were mentioned in this context); both sides under-
stand each other’s views on the division of Korea; and oppose the
intervention of foreign military forces.
President Ceausescu said there have been delays and rejections
granting permission for technology licensing for Romania. Agreements
with US firms are thwarted by delays and problems, particularly
involving electronics and nuclear matters.
The President asked George Vest to respond. Mr. Vest said this
matter had been discussed earlier with Ceausescu by Under Secretary
the Cabinet Room at the White House.

Romania
of Commerce Harmon, and Secretary Vance and Foreign Minister
Andrei had also considered it. The [Assistant] Secretary said he would
look into the problem in order to expedite the handling of such requests
from the Romanians.
The President expressed his desire to be helpful and said he would
send Ceausescu a letter on this subject after it has been looked into.2
President Ceausescu said he would write only if there were prob-
lems, but he hoped it would not reach the presidential level.
The President said a letter would be sent in the next week. He
indicated an interest to work with the Romanians in preparation for
the Madrid CSCE review in order to avoid disappointment similar to
that over Belgrade.
President Ceausescu expressed interest in cooperation to create a
better climate for Madrid. He also noted the importance of consultation
in the next weeks on the UN Special Session on Disarmament (SSOD).
Contacts have already taken place, but further ones would contribute
to a positive result.
The President expressed hope for the success of the SSOD, and
noted that a number of government leaders will attend the session. He
expressed a willingness to share ideas with the Romanians.
Ceausescu asked for better cooperation in dealing with underdevel-
opment and establishing a new international economic order.
The President said this problem has come up in discussions with
other leaders, who have suggested a more constructive forum for an
exchange of ideas between the industrial and developing countries. The
structure of the Group of 77 does not seem conducive to a constructive
dialogue. If these issues can be dealt with through less rhetoric and
more communication, it will result in progress.
Ceausescu suggested that the UN would provide a suitable
framework.
The President said it was an appropriate time to consider meeting
the needs of the developing countries. He considered the exchange a
fruitful one and is desirous to strengthen ties between the two countries.
2 In a letter to Ceausescu on April 22, Carter informed the Romanian leader that
he had looked into the issue of export control for Romania and found Romania received
“the most favorable treatment possible” under U.S. law. He also stated that he tasked
agencies responsible for approvals to make special efforts to speed up the process for
all countries, including Romania. The same day, Brzezinski sent a memorandum to the
Secretaries of Commerce, State, Defense, and Energy informing them of Carter’s letter
and his instructions. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material,
President’s Correspondence with Foreign Leaders File, Box 16, Romania: President Nico-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
The discussion of human rights was useful. Although the two countries
have different perspectives, they share similar goals.
President Ceausescu expressed thanks for the talks and the visit
and hoped that relations will further develop. Other questions remain
to be discussed, but they can be tackled when the President accepts
the invitation to visit Romania.
Following the talks at 12:00 the two presidents were joined by their
wives for the signing of the Joint Declaration.3
205.
Action Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State
for European Affairs (Vest) to Acting Secretary of State
Christopher1
Washington, August 18, 1978
SUBJECT
US-Romanian Relations: Next Steps
The Romanians will be upset over the Pacepa case for some time.2
It will affect the tone and frequency of their contacts and exchanges
with us. Ceausescu’s image as a man in control of his internal affairs
is shaken and his natural paranoia about his advisers is heightened.
As unfortunate as this event surely is, Ceausescu is now in a phase
of high international posture with his recent speech once again declar-
ing Romania’s independent foreign policy line, his cool meeting with
Chron—1978. Secret; Roger Channel. Luers initialed the memorandum for Vest. Drafted
by Schmidt; cleared by Luers. The date is handwritten at the top of the first page. The
word “Acting” is inserted by hand before Secretary.
2 Lieutenant-General Ion Mihai Pacepa, First Deputy of the Director of Foreign
Intelligence Branch of the Securitate, State Secretary in the Ministry of Interior, and
Ceausescu’s counselor for National Security and Economic Development, defected to
the United States on an official trip to West Germany in August. He was the highest-
ranking Eastern European defector during the cold war. In September 1978, the Romanian
Government indicted Pacepa for high treason, condemned him to death, and placed a
$2 million bounty on his head. The death sentence was overturned in 1999 by the
Romanian Supreme Court.

Romania
Brezhnev, and the visit of Chairman Hua. (We and INR have sent you
separately an analysis of Ceausescu’s current international posture.)
Our conclusion is that Ceausescu needs his relations with the US as
much, if not more than he did before. It is in our interest to play to
that reality and trust that in time they will get over the Pacepa affair.
The Romanians have come back again on Pacepa (Tab A),3 demand-
ing that he be extradited. We believe that, because of the conjunction
of the Pacepa case and Ceausescu’s current exposed position in interna-
tional affairs, it would be advisable, via some specific positive steps,
to reiterate our continued commitment to improved US-Romanian
relations. We propose the following:
Instruct Ambassador Aggrey to tell Andrei that the President is
prepared to send a special emissary to Romania soon. The Romanians
like the idea of special emissaries (you recall Pungan).
The emissary would:
—Report candidly on Pacepa, stressing that we had no part in his
decision to defect.
—Report on the Camp David Summit (which Ceausescu would
welcome because of his earlier role in the Middle East talks), and seek
a full briefing on Hua’s visit.
—Present concrete evidence of our continued interest in bilateral
economic cooperation by informing the Romanians of USG approval
of certain pending export license cases of special interest to them.
—Tell Andrei that you are looking forward to meeting with him
at the UNGA, especially to discuss various international issues.
We also have a Vance-Ceausescu letter, now awaiting NSC clear-
ance, on the Middle East Summit which reiterates the President’s per-
sonal interest in good bilateral relations.
Who to be the special emissary?
There are two good candidates for special emissary: Christopher
and Nimetz. Both will be in the area in the coming weeks on other
business.
The Deputy Secretary would be the highest level official (other
than Secretary Bergland) to visit Romania in this Administration.4 As
with Manea Manescu, as well as several other Romanian officials. The Embassy transmit-
ted a summary of his meetings and discussions on May 25, in telegram 3594 from
Bucharest. (National Archives, RG 59, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Office of
Analysis for the Commonwealth and Eastern Europe, Office Subject Files, 1965–1980,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
special emissary, he would thus underscore the high importance of
our concern. A visit could be tied in with his planned trip to Greece.
Matt Nimetz knows Romania well and the Romanians like and
trust him as a result of their frequent contacts. His reputation as Counse-
lor and “trouble shooter” would enhance his role as special emissary.
He could make the visit in connection with his trip to Cyprus.
Recommendations:
1. That you agree to send a special emissary in early September
who would be authorized to discuss US-Romanian relations and brief
Ceausescu on the Camp David Summit, as outlined above.
Approve
Disapprove
Nimetz
5 Christopher
Other
2. That you authorize the special emissary to tell Andrei that you
want to meet with him at the UNGA, with specific timing to be worked
out later.
Agree
6 Disagree
5 Christopher approved sending Nimetz as a Special Emissary to Bucharest and
added: “If convenient on his Cyprus trip.”
6 Christopher approved a meeting between the Secretary and Andrei at the UNGA.
He deleted “you want” and added: “Secretary would be glad to meet with him should
he wish such a meeting.”

Romania
206.
Memorandum From Stephen Larrabee of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, September 22, 1978
SUBJECT
Possible Meeting with Romanian Foreign Minister Stefan Andrei
During Matt Nimetz’s recent visit to Romania, Romanian Foreign
Minister Stefan Andrei expressed an interest in meeting with you per-
sonally when he is in the States next week for the opening of the UN
General Assembly.
Andrei is presently scheduled to meet with Secretary Vance on
September 26 in New York. However, a number of factors suggest that
a meeting with you might also be useful.
—Ceausescu’s deep concern over the impact of the Pacepa affair
on U.S.-Romanian relations (as Christopher’s memo to the President
on Nimetz’s visit makes clear, Tab I)2
—Romania’s more exposed position since the Hua visit.
—Recent indications of Soviet chagrin over Ceausescu’s policy.
(Brezhnev was highly critical of Ceausescu at the Crimean meetings
with East European leaders in July and allegedly told Kadar that he
intended to intensify contacts with other Romanian leaders.)3
A meeting with Andrei would give you an opportunity:
—to reassure Andrei of the President’s interest in good relations
with Romania and his intention not to let the Pacepa affair interfere
with the improvement in relations that has taken place over the last
few years;
—to get a firsthand report of Hua’s visit and sound out Andrei on
the Romanian regime’s intentions vis-a-vis China; and
ian media described the Crimea meeting between Brezhnev and Ceausescu as “‘an
exchange of views’ in a ‘sincere’ atmosphere, perhaps the least flattering terms in Roman-
ian interparty rhetoric.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780325–
0657) Brezhnev also criticized Ceausescu during his meeting with Todor Zhivkov, stating
that Ceausescu’s policies were moving Romania out of step with the rest of the Warsaw
Pact countries. (Information on conversation of the Secretary General of the CC of the
CPSU (Leonid I. Brezhnev) with the Bulgarian Head of State (Todor Zhivkov) in Crimea,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
—to explore possible ways in which Romania could play a con-
structive role in the Middle East after Camp David.
I realize that the Romanians tend to want high-level treatment
more than is always justified. However, for reasons outlined above,
the relationship could legitimately stand a little stroking at this point
and a meeting with Andrei would provide a useful opportunity to do
this. I discussed this matter informally with Matt Nimetz shortly after
his return and he concurs with this view.
If you do decide to see Andrei, the meeting should be arranged
quietly in order not to alert other foreign ministers who will also be
in New York and who might want similar treatment.
RECOMMENDATION:
That you meet with Andrei when he is in the States at a time to
be arranged.4
4 Brzezinski approved, adding in the margin “if he wants to come here. I will not
go to NYC.” Bartholomew wrote under the recommendation: “ZB: Steve makes a good
case. But frankly, seeing you may simply give Andrei & the Romanians another crack
(at you) on pushing on Pacepa. Better to let Vance turn the page on all this in his
N.Y. meeting with Andrei. And you have real and ample grounds to plead scheduling
problems, and I don’t in any event think Andrei will take it amiss. RB.” See Document 208.

Romania
207.
Report Prepared in the Department of State1
Washington, undated
The Romanian Defector Case
The Counsellor of the Department of State, Matt Nimetz, visited
Romania on September 8 as a Special Emissary to discuss the case of
Ion Mihai Pacepa, the Deputy Director of Romanian Intelligence, who
defected to the West in August. The Romanians have been particularly
upset by this defection because of the close personal relationship Pacepa
had with President Ceausescu.2 They say that in light of the current
very positive state of US-Romanian relations and the April 1978 visit
to the United States by Ceausescu, it is impossible for them to under-
stand our accepting this defector and initially demanded that we return
Pacepa to Romania through extradition or otherwise.
Despite the Romanian concern, we do not believe that the defection
will affect our basic relationship with them in the long term. Romania
has a strong need for special ties to us as they pursue a foreign policy
independent of the Soviets, and the Nimetz trip proved highly useful
in demonstrating our continuing interest in maintaining just such a
relationship.
In Bucharest, Nimetz made the following points to Foreign Minister
Stefan Andrei:3
I–026, Romania—JEC. Secret; Sensitive. Sent under an undated covering memorandum
from Tarnoff to Brzezinski. Gates forwarded the memorandum to Brzezinski and wrote:
“Zbig—Regarding page 4: Given what the Romanians did to those RFE broadcasters
(the CIA report last week), I would not trust them at all—especially in light of Ceausescu’s
personal sense of betrayal concerning Pacepa and his apparent weakness for revenge.”
Brzezinski forwarded the memorandum and the note to David Aaron adding “DA Stress
to Carlucci the need to protect Pacepa’s safety.” Aaron wrote “Done” on the note.
called him to a meeting in the Black Sea resort of Neptun to “convey President Ceausescu’s
urgent request that U.S. return to Romania, General Mihai Pacepa” and that, in Ceauses-
cu’s opinion, “should the CIA keep Pacepa this could not be considered a friendly
gesture and would not be of a nature to permit improvement of our bilateral relations.
Romania will draw the lessons it should from our response.” After conveying Andrei’s
message, Aggrey commented: “Decision not to honor Ceausescu’s request is likely to
seriously impair progress in our bilateral relations, especially in important humanitarian
and consular areas. It may well produce serious general degradation for considerable
period.” (Department of State, INR/IL Historical Files, Box 11, Bucharest)
sation with Andrei on Pacepa and other intelligence issues. (Ibid.) Andrei responded to
Nimetz presentation the evening of September 8, when he joined Nimetz and Aggrey
at dinner. Aggrey reported in telegram 6322 from Bucharest, September 9, that the
Romanian Government had dropped the extradition demand, but was requesting that
Pacepa not be allowed to remain in the United States. (Ibid.)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
—The U.S. Government believes that this matter should not inter-
fere with the steadily improving tone of US-Romanian relations.
—We will refrain from publicly exploiting Pacepa’s presence in
the United States.
—Pacepa came to the United States of his own volition. No clandes-
tine relationship existed between Pacepa and the U.S. Government
before he presented himself to us in Bonn.
—Extradition would not be possible in this case, and if Romania
pursued extradition it would only lead to unfortunate publicity.
—The only proper course, and the one best suited to maintaining
our excellent relationship, is to close the book on this entire matter.
—There are no indications that Pacepa’s family knew anything
about his plans. We hope that treatment of his wife and daughter will
not compel Pacepa to raise the matter of their treatment publicly, which
inevitably would have an adverse impact on our bilateral relations.
In order to signal to the Romanians that we were following a course
of “business as usual,” Nimetz briefed them on a wide range of issues
including the Middle East, China, US-Soviet relations, Southern Africa
and disarmament. Nimetz also discussed bilateral issues and listed the
positive economic decisions we have made since the Ceausescu visit
(approval of a large number of export control cases, an ExIm loan
approval, the Romanian fishing allotment, and CCC credits).4
Andrei, after consulting with Ceausescu, responded as follows,
emphasizing that this was a personal and confidential message from
Ceausescu to you:
—President Ceausescu shares President Carter’s desire to maintain
the dialogue between the two countries and the momentum of the
developing relationship.
—To eliminate this impediment to progress, it is necessary that
Pacepa not be allowed to remain in the United States. Although extradi-
tion would be awkward, the United States is not required to permit
Pacepa to remain in this country.
—Pacepa has already created problems with his provocative and
misleading information. This has been designed to injure Romania’s
relations with the United States, Germany, and the West in general.
Certainly there are other forces (he meant, but did not name, the Soviet
Union) who are interested in the deterioration of relations among the
US, FRG, and Romania.
4 The Embassy in Bucharest reported on Nimetz’s bilateral discussions in telegram

Romania
Andrei concluded by stating that Ceausescu told him to reiterate
the full strength of the Romanian President’s desire for a political
decision to continue to strengthen the cooperation between our two
countries, and to find means to deal with the Pacepa matter in a way
that does not do harm to our foreign relations or those of Romania.
Andrei then made the following personal comments:
—Without specifically mentioning the Soviet Union, Andrei left
no doubt that the Romanians believe Pacepa is serving Soviet interests
and was probably directed to defect by the Soviets. ([2 lines not declassi-
fied] This is a typical Eastern European reaction to discredit officials
who defect.)
—He repeated several times that Pacepa had been in charge of
security for Ceausescu on many official visits. Pacepa could, and would,
seek to embarrass Ceausescu and harm Romanian interests with
many countries.
—Andrei emphasized his and Ceausescu’s shock that the United
States would give sanctuary to this traitor, given the excellent relations
developed by the two Presidents and the improved relationship
between the two governments. A way should be found to get him out
of the United States.
[1 paragraph (2 lines) not declassified]
Secretary Vance will tell Andrei in New York next week that
Ceausescu’s message has been passed to the White House and will
reiterate our belief that the Pacepa case should be put behind us so
that our relations with Romania may continue to expand and improve.5
In addition, with Pacepa’s consent, we will explore with the Roman-
ians an arrangement whereby Pacepa would voluntarily leave the
United States. [1 line not declassified] In return, the Romanians would
for September 29 was canceled and apparently rescheduled for October 2; see Document
209. On September 29, Nimetz and Andrei met to discuss the Pacepa case over breakfast
at the Romanian Mission to the United Nations. The Department reported the conversa-
tion to Ambassador Aggrey in telegram 252848 to Bucharest, October 4. Nimetz told
Andrei that “in his personal view, it was very significant that the U.S. Government had
responded in this sensitive matter by agreeing to facilitate, at the request of another
government, the departure of a person who we had taken in. He knew of no similar
case. The Romanian side therefore should consider this as very significant.” Andrei
responded that a decision on the issue could only be taken by Ceausescu. (INR/IL,
980643000018, Box 11, Bucharest) No response to the offer was found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
permit Pacepa’s wife and daughter to join him6 and would give assur-
ances with respect to Pacepa’s safety.7
[1 paragraph (2 lines) not declassified]
6 On September 22, Nimetz forwarded to Christopher a draft memorandum for the
President reporting on his trip to Bucharest. In the covering memorandum, Nimetz
informed Christopher that his plan was to raise the issue of Pacepa’s resettlement in a
private meeting with Andrei following the bilateral with Vance, provided “the Romanian
Government permitted his family to join him and assured his safety.” (National Archives,
RG 59, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Mr. Matthew Nimetz, Counselor of the Department
of State, Under Secretary for Security Assistance, Science, and Technology, January 1977
7 During his September 8 conversation with Andrei, Nimetz informed him that the
UnitedStateshadinformationofplansbytheRomanianintelligenceservices“tophysically
eliminate several persons residing in the United States.” “It is imperative” Nimetz told
Andrei, “that control be placed over these present and planned activities and that they be
stopped forthwith. You can be assured that my Government will take all necessary mea-
sures to protect our citizens. If these plans are not abandoned, the most serious conse-
quences for our relationship must be expected.” On September 1, prior to his departure,
Nimetz forwarded the talking points in this report to Christopher for approval. (National
Archives, RG 59, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Mr. Matthew Nimetz, Counselor of the
Department of State, Under Secretary for Security Assistance, Science, and Technology,
IL, 980643000018, Box 11, Bucharest)
208.
Memorandum of Conversation1
SUBJECT
Summary of Dr. Brzezinski’s Meeting with
Foreign Romanian Minister Stefan Andrei
PARTICIPANTS
Foreign Minister Stefan Andrei
Mr. Mitran, Secretary to Mr. Andrei
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
F. Stephen Larrabee, NSC (Notetaker)
The meeting took place in Brzezinski’s office at the White House.

Romania
After expressing his appreciation for Dr. Brzezinski taking the time
to meet with him, Mr. Andrei noted that President Ceausescu had
received the news of the meeting between Dr. Brzezinski and Andrei
with pleasure. Mr. Andrei then handed Dr. Brzezinski a letter from
President Ceausescu in answer to President Carter on the Middle East.2
Remarking that unfortunately time was limited due to the necessity
of responding to Gromyko’s latest SALT proposal, Dr. Brzezinski stated
that President Carter had asked him to transmit his greetings to Presi-
dent Ceausescu and to tell President Ceausescu how much he valued
his relations with the (Romanian) President. President Carter recalled
President Ceausescu’s perceptive comments on international issues.
Mr. Andrei then gave Dr. Brzezinski a book dedicated to Ceauses-
cu’s visit to the United States and said he would convey to President
Ceausescu President Carter’s remarks. He stressed that Romania was
determined to work for the development of U.S.-Romanian relations
in the spirit agreed at the Ceausescu-Carter meeting and that the RCP
had highly evaluated the meeting between President Carter and Presi-
dent Ceausescu. Noting that his desire was to see an improvement in
relations, Mr. Andrei said that it was in this spirit that he wished to
raise three problems presently affecting bilateral relations.
The first was related to the defection of Ion Pacepa. This had created
no little tension. Andrei noted that Romania had asked for Pacepa’s
extradition, but that it understood the difficulties which this would
present. Romania believed nonetheless that a decision not to allow
Pacepa to remain in the U.S. would help U.S.-Romanian relations. Mr.
Andrei stated that Pacepa had been working for some time for the CIA
and that he had been involved in financial scandals in the Federal
Republic. He repeated that Romania would like to see Pacepa’s stay
in the United States voided.
The second problem raised by Mr. Andrei related to (unspecified)
employees in the U.S. Embassy in Bucharest who he claimed had been
inciting Romanian citizens not to return to Romania while they were
abroad, particularly people in the field of science and technology. Mr.
2 In a letter dated September 23, Ceausescu praised the agreements reached at Camp
David between Egypt and Israel, but restated the Romanian position that peace in the
Middle East could only be achieved by inclusion of all involved parties, including the
Palestinians. Ceausescu noted that the accords did not oblige Israel “to withdraw not
only from the Sinai, but from the West Bank, Gaza, and Golan [Heights] as well, respec-
tively from all Arab territories occupied in the wake of 1967 war.” Ceausescu also called
for resumption of the Geneva Talks on the Middle East and assured Carter that Romania
would continue to “bring its active contribution to the instauration of a climate of lasting
peace and full security in this area.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski
Material, President’s Correspondence with Foreign Leaders File, Box 16, Romania: Presi-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
Andrei noted that Romania had not made these actions public nor had
many party members been informed of details of the actions because
the Romanian leadership did not wish to overcharge the atmosphere
or create an incident. However, the Romanians would like to see such
actions stopped.
The third issue raised by Mr. Andrei concerned economic relations,
which he noted were generally developing quite well. However, it
would be most helpful if the processing of export licenses could be
accelerated. He also noted that President Carter’s letter had been
well received.3
Dr. Brzezinski then responded to the points raised by Mr. Andrei.
He began by stressing the importance that the U.S. attached to relations
with Romania and the respect which the U.S. had for President Ceau-
sescu. The U.S. considered Ceausescu an important international States-
man and a friend. Dr. Brzezinski emphasized that relations between
Romania and the United States were good and that it was in this
perspective that he wished to speak.
On the question of economic relations, Dr. Brzezinski pointed out
that President Carter had ordered an acceleration of the processing of
export licenses and he asked Mr. Larrabee to check on this. Dr. Brzezin-
ski then raised the case of Dr. Vlad Georgescu, who had been invited
to spend a year at the Woodrow Wilson Center but whose visa had
yet to be approved.4 Mr. Andrei said that the case had been raised
during his conversation with Counselor Nimetz the preceding day;
he would discuss this with President Ceausescu when he returned
to Romania.5
Regarding Mr. Andrei’s complaints about alleged agitation on the
part of employees of the U.S. Embassy in Bucharest, Dr. Brzezinski
said he was skeptical of such reports and would be very surprised if
they were true. It was possible they arose out of some misunderstand-
4 Earlier on September 30, Larrabee sent Brzezinski a memorandum with talking
points for his meeting with Andrei on the Pacepa case, export licensing, and Vlad
Georgescu, a Romanian scholar and dissident who was invited by the Woodrow Wilson
Center on a one-year fellowship in Washington and whose exit visa was being denied
by the Romanian Government. The meeting with Brzezinski was intended to follow a
meeting with Vance in New York the previous day but it had been canceled at the last
minute. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File,
sions on bilateral issues between Nimetz and Andrei in New York on September 29.
sion on Pacepa was reported in telegram 252848 to Bucharest. See footnote 5, Docu-
ment 207.

Romania
ing. He promised to look into the matter.6 He assured Mr. Andrei,
however, that this was not a deliberate policy on the part of the U.S.
government, which he stressed does not engage in such activities as a
matter of policy. He would check on it and asked Mr. Larrabee to
investigate the charges and report his findings to him. If the charges
proved to be true—which he doubted would be the case—he would
call a halt to such activities.
Dr. Brzezinski then turned to the case of Ion Pacepa. He pointed out
that Mr. Andrei could not be serious about the charges. The Romanians
could not charge that Pacepa was a CIA agent and then at the same
time ask for his extradition. They could not have it both ways. He was
sure that Romania did not turn over its agents, and the Romanians
could not realistically ask the U.S. to do something which they them-
selves would not do. Dr. Brzezinski stressed, however, that the U.S.
was prepared to arrange for Pacepa’s resettlement in a third country
with his family. He assured Mr. Andrei that the U.S. had not enticed
Pacepa to defect. In his view, the best way to handle the case was
quietly and he emphasized that the U.S. had no intention of exploit-
ing the case, which should not be allowed to become an irritant in
Romanian-U.S. relations.
Dr. Brzezinski next raised the case of several employees of Radio
Free Europe (former Romanian citizens) in Munich who were beaten
up under strange circumstances.7 Mr. Andrei replied that he knew
nothing about the case. Dr. Brzezinski noted that as Foreign Minister,
it was quite possible that Mr. Andrei did not know about such incidents
made by Andrei that U.S. Embassy employees were encouraging Romanian citizens to
emigrate and asked the Embassy to investigate. (National Archives, RG 59, Central
rest, October 13, stated that the allegations were “without foundation.” Aggrey wrote:
“It is my strong impression that Andrei’s complaint was prompted by two different but
related considerations: hypersensitivity of Romanian security establishment and GOR
top level to US-Romanian consular relations in wake of Pacepa defection” and Embassy
officials’ contact with Romanian citizens, especially Vlad Georgescu and Ecaterina Rauta.
Aggrey continued: “These are sensitive cases for GOR, especially at this time. However,
contacts involve legitimate US interest in persons who decided on their own, prior to
contact, that they wish to travel to US.” Aggrey recommended that the Department
inform the Romanian Government that the complaint was carefully investigated and
found to be without merit. The Ambassador also recommended that the Romanians be
informed that “it would not be supportive of progress in bilateral relations both sides
seek for current sensitivities to result in restrictions on or obstacles to normal conduct
of consular operations.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
attack in Paris on RFE Romanian broadcast freelancer Monica Lovinescu. (National
ment 207.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
which were normally carried out by other branches of the government,
but that the U.S. nonetheless wished to see them stopped. Dr. Brzezinski
stressed, however, that these issues were relatively minor points. The
really important point was that U.S.-Romanian relations remain good
and that both governments should not let subjective irritants affect
relations.
Mr. Andrei replied that in the case of the agitation of the employees
of the U.S. Embassy in Bucharest, he had purposely not raised the issue
with the U.S. Ambassador because he did not want to cause an incident
and unnecessarily disturb relations.
Dr. Brzezinski then briefed Mr. Andrei on the recent SALT discus-
sions with Mr. Gromyko, noting that the U.S. and the Soviet Union
were very close to an agreement. The Soviets had made proposals and
the U.S. had made counterproposals. While certain issues related to
the Backfire and cruise missiles still remained unresolved, the two
sides had significantly reduced differences and an agreement was close.
Mr. Andrei then briefed Dr. Brzezinski on the recent visit of Chinese
Party Chairman Hua Kuo-Feng to Romania. He stressed that the visit
was part of a general opening up on the part of China, not just econom-
ically but politically, militarily and scientifically. A PRC diplomatic
offensive would be coming up. Hua realizes that China is lagging
behind and that it must modernize. During the course of the visit Hua
constantly asked Andrei detailed technical questions. How was this
made, how much did this cost, etc. In regard to the Soviet Union, Mr.
Andrei noted that the PRC’s policy toward the USSR had not changed.
Dr. Brzezinski remarked that Gromyko had been very concerned
about the Chinese-Japanese Friendship Pact and had also been very
concerned about Chinese contacts with Europe.8
Mr. Andrei replied that Romania had informed the Soviets about
Hua’s visit; it was not discussed at the Crimea, however. The Soviet
Union was particularly nervous because the visit had been preceded
by the signing of the Chinese-Japanese Treaty. Mr. Andrei underscored
the importance the Romanians attached to preserving their independ-
ence. They had not fought to exchange one master for another.
Dr. Brzezinski asked whether Hua had said anything about U.S.-
Chinese relations.
Mr. Andrei said no, that the issue had not come up. If it had, the
Romanians would have informed the United States. Relations with
Albania, the non-aligned and Vietnam, inter alia, were discussed.

Romania
Dr. Brzezinski asked whether Mr. Andrei felt the U.S. should estab-
lish diplomatic relations with Vietnam. He noted that Vietnam had
dropped all conditions. They were now ready to accept the U.S. position
and establish relations in U.S. terms. How did Mr. Andrei think that
the Chinese would react to the establishment of relations between the
U.S. and Vietnam?
Mr. Andrei replied that he could not speak for the Chinese. In his
(personal) opinion, the Chinese had not always acted wisely toward
the Vietnamese. He did think, however, that Vietnam would eventually
reach an independent position. He also noted that President Ceausescu
had urged Vietnam to establish relations with the United States.
Dr. Brzezinski then asked about the situation in Cambodia and
some of the stories of inhuman conditions there.
Mr. Andrei noted that many of these stories were true. The present
leadership in Cambodia was not the leadership Vietnam had hoped
for. The regime was strong, however, and an independent interme-
diary would be needed to help settle the dispute. In conclusion, he
emphasized that the situation was very complex, both internally and
externally.
Dr. Brzezinski again pressed Mr. Andrei about the establishment
of diplomatic relations with Vietnam. Did he think it was a good idea?
Mr. Andrei replied yes, he did. While he could not speak for the
Chinese, he felt they should realize that it was not good to have Vietnam
dependent on one power. The establishment of relations with the U.S.
was not an anti-Chinese move and the Chinese should recognize this.
Dr. Brzezinski expressed the hope that at some point he might be
able to visit Bucharest. Mr. Andrei assured him he would be welcome.
Mr. Andrei then stated that he had a request from President Ceausescu.
The Romanians would welcome a short visit of Secretary Vance or the
President when they were in Europe or the Middle East.
Dr. Brzezinski said he would bear it in mind and would support
such a request. He then thanked Mr. Andrei for the opportunity to
discuss the various issues in such an open and frank manner.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
209.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
Romania1
256604. For the Ambassador. Subject: The Secretary’s October 2
Meeting at UNGA With Foreign Minister Andrei.
Romanian Participants
Stefan Andrei, Foreign Minister
Teodor Marinescu, Ambassador to the United Nations
Mircea Mitran, Special Assistant to the Foreign Minister (Interpreter)
US Participants
The Secretary
Matthew Nimetz, Counselor
Carl Schmidt, Director, EUR/EE (notetaker)
1. Summary—Andrei stressed the importance which President
Ceausescu attaches to good US-Romanian relations and to elimination
of issues which impede their further development. Andrei said the fact
that the US allowed Pacepa to come here has created tensions, and he
requested the US to cease all “covert activities” against Romania. The
Secretary said we understand Romania’s concerns but we must now
put this case behind us. Andrei said Romania would continue to strive
to solve emigration problems in a humanitarian spirit. He said some
progress had been made in resolving export license problems, but
Romania wished to accelerate the process. The Secretary indicated
we had worked hard to make progress in this area and cited recent
consideration of a license for the Rom-Control Data joint venture as
a positive example. Andrei appealed for more liberal treatment of
Romanian exports. The Secretary accepted in principle an invitation
to visit Romania. He reiterated the strong interest of the US in continu-
ing to expand relations with Romania, and expressed appreciation
for Romania’s cooperative efforts on various international issues. The
Secretary and Andrei briefly reviewed the status of the Camp David
Accords, and issues involving Lebanon and Greece-Turkey. End
summary.
2. Introductory comments—Andrei said he was aware how very
busy the Secretary was, and therefore he was especially grateful that
he had made time available to meet. President Ceausescu had asked
Confidential; Priority, Exdis. Sent for information to USUN. Drafted by Schmidt; cleared
by Nimetz; approved by George H. Mitchell in S.

Romania
him to convey, through the Secretary, greetings of friendship to Presi-
dent Carter and best wishes for health and success. Ceausescu recalled
with pleasure his most recent visit to the United States. Andrei gave
the Secretary a book, on behalf of Ceausescu, commemorating the visit.
The Secretary expressed appreciation and said the President continues
to talk about his meetings with President Ceausescu and their impor-
tance for relations between the two countries. The President strongly
believes that it was a most positive and constructive visit. He had asked
that his own warmest regards be conveyed to President Ceausescu.
3. Bilateral relations—Andrei said that, in a meeting with President
Ceausescu just before leaving for the UNGA, he had directed Andrei
to make clear that he intends to carry out all of the understandings
reached during his US visit both with respect to bilateral cooperation
and to international issues. Ceausescu, Andrei said, attaches great
importance to good US-Romanian relations and to their further devel-
opment. Based on Ceausescu’s desire to create the best conditions for
development of relations and to eliminate matters not consistent with
this approach, Andrei said, he wished to present several issues in which
he would request our cooperation in eliminating. He would talk openly
as the Secretary and the President had talked with President Ceausescu
during his visit. Andrei said the two countries should not allow certain
issues to cast a shadow over our good bilateral relations. President
Ceausescu was convinced that President Carter would appreciate the
constructive manner in which these matters were being raised.
4. The Pacepa case—To be frank, Andrei said, the fact that the US
Government has given the right of entry and stay to Pacepa has created
certain tensions, especially in light of the personal, friendly relations
established earlier between the two Presidents. It was GOR’s view,
based on its information, that Pacepa had worked for the CIA for
several years. However, Andrei said, the US had a different view on
this question. Romania requested that the US cease all types of such
activities vis-a-vis Romania. It was not through such covert actions,
Andrei said, that good bilateral relations had developed. Nor was it
through covert activities that Romania had contributed to establish-
ment of US–PRC relations, to the negotiations to end the Vietnam war,
to direct contacts between Begin and Sadat and to a general resolution
of the Middle East conflict. Andrei said he was persuaded that the
Secretary understood these considerations.
5. The Secretary, in response, said the US understands Romania’s
concerns regarding the Pacepa case. President Carter believes strongly
that we must now put this matter behind us. Also, the Secretary said,
he wished to reiterate his strong interest and that of the President in
continuing the excellent relations which had developed between the
US and Romania. With regard to the Minister’s reference to cooperation

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
on various international issues, the Secretary said, this had been
extremely helpful to us. We appreciated these efforts and we would
like to continue the beneficial exchange of views through our Embassies
on such issues as the PRC and the Middle East.
6. Divided families—Andrei referred to emigration and said Roma-
nia had strived to solve emigration problems in a humanitarian spirit
and would continue to do so in the future. The Secretary said he
appreciated the Foreign Minister’s initiative in mentioning this issue.
As we had made clear in the past, it was very important to us that
humanitarian problems be addressed and solved in a satisfactory way.
7. Trade—Andrei said he had recently discussed with Nimetz
Romania’s interest in resolving export license problems. Some progress
had been achieved but Romania would still like to accelerate the process
for license approvals. Also, Romania would like to see more liberal
treatment of its exports to the United States. The Secretary said we
had worked hard to move forward in export licensing. We recognize
the importance of joint ventures and our recent decision concerning
another license for the Control Data Corporation joint venture was a
good example of our efforts in this regard.
8. Visit by the Secretary—Andrei said President Ceausescu wished
to renew his invitation to the Secretary to make at least a brief visit to
Romania. Such a visit would have a positive impact on our relations
by helping to clear away issues which have arisen. It would also be a
visible sign that we were overcoming them. No less important, Andrei
said, a visit would provide an opportunity for a full discussion of
international issues. Ceausescu would like to discuss with the Secretary
issues concerning the Middle East, Europe, and elsewhere. The Secre-
tary said he was pleased to accept the invitation in principle. He would
have to leave the question of timing to later, however, since at the
moment he was very occupied with follow-up to the Camp David
Summit and other matters.
9. International issues—Andrei expressed appreciation for Presi-
dent Carter’s message following the Camp David Summit and asked
about the current situation. The Secretary said the follow-up steps were
moving as expected. Negotiations on the Sinai Agreement, chaired by
the US, would begin in Washington on October 12. He was confident
negotiations would move rapidly; there could be an agreement between
Israel and Egypt as early as mid-November. Responding to Andrei’s
questions, the Secretary said King Hussein was torn between joining
in the negotiations on the West Bank and Gaza or staying out to see
what would develop. Hussein would have to be careful but, the Secre-
tary said, he believed he would begin to participate in a careful and
measured way. Regarding Palestinian refugees, the Secretary said the
US believes a meeting of all the concerned parties should be convened

Romania
to resolve the problem. There has been too much talk and too little
action. The Secretary also expressed concern about the situation in
Lebanon, noting that the problem should be addressed in a comprehen-
sive rather than fragmented way. Andrei referred to Greek-Turkish
problems, and the Secretary noted that he had just seen Cypriot Presi-
dent Kyprianou.2 All the parties were in agreement that a solution must
be found regarding Cyprus. The Greek-Turkish dispute concerning the
Aegean was very difficult, the Secretary said, and he suggested that
Romania join with others in urging the two countries to find a lasting
resolution to these issues.
10. The Secretary and Andrei met for almost 30 minutes. Immedi-
ately following their meeting, Counselor Nimetz continued the discus-
sion of international issues with Andrei.3 Nimetz briefly described
the status of SALT negotiations, and responded to several additional
questions from Andrei concerning the Camp David Accords and the
Lebanese situation.
Vance
3 No record of the separate conversation was found.
210.
Editorial Note
tive Committee (PCC) met in Moscow to approve a report by Unified
Warsaw Pact Forces Commander in Chief Marshal Viktor Kulikov and
adopt a joint declaration on several aspects of international affairs. The
meeting in Moscow sought to reach agreement on increased defense
expenditures by Pact members to countermand Soviet perceptions of
an emerging imbalance of power between the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization and the Warsaw Pact. Speaking at the meeting, increas-
ingly frail Soviet General Secretary Leonid Brezhnev cautioned that
“imperialism has now acquired an ally—today’s China.” Brezhnev
continued: “They have already begun to feed today’s China, to supply
it with weapons, and to push it toward hostile excursions against the
socialist countries.” Setting out Soviet expectations for the meeting,
Brezhnev added “The NATO countries coordinate their actions care-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
fully in the military sphere. And it would be unforgivable if we did
not do everything to ensure precise coordination among the Warsaw
Treaty countries on defense issues.” (Mastny and Byrne, A Cardboard
Castle?, pages 418–421)
Even before the meeting started, Romanian President Nicolae
Ceausescu’s foreign policy goals came at odds with the consensus
of the other Warsaw Pact leaders. In telegram 28013 from Moscow,
November 16, the Embassy reported that, according to a Romanian
diplomat, the documents to be adopted at the Moscow meeting were
still being worked on and that if Bucharest had its way “any documents
adopted will be relatively non-polemical, non-offensive, and general-
ized.” Disagreement, the telegram continued, “exists primarily between
the Soviets and Romanians on a number of topics to be mentioned in
the conference documents,” including “the Middle East, Vietnam, and
relations between socialist states.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central
Foreign Policy File, D780475–0330) The declaration, the Embassy in
Moscow reported in telegram 29052, November 27, focused primarily
on disarmament and was “less polemical than has been case in recent
Soviet commentary on these subjects.” The Embassy reported: The
declaration was “also noteworthy for what it omits. This is particularly
true of its failure to attack the Camp David Accords. If any doubt
existed that Romania was responsible for this deviation from the Soviet
line, it was removed when the other six PCC participants issued their
supplemental declaration.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
Policy File, D780488–0757)
After the end of the Moscow meeting, the members of the Warsaw
Pact except Romania published a statement on the Middle East attack-
ing the Camp David Accords and restating their support for the Bagdad
Conference, the Arab League summit which denounced Sadat’s sepa-
rate peace with Israel and excluded Egypt from the organization. Roma-
nia’s strong support for the Camp David Accords, despite Ceausescu’s
previous reservations about a limited Egyptian-Israeli understanding
without inclusion of the other parties, made it impossible to issue
a unified Warsaw Pact statement. Its publication without Romanian
support underscored the tensions between Bucharest and the other
members.
A much stronger disagreement revolved around the presentation
made by Kulikov on the status of Warsaw Pact forces, and especially
on the proposal for agreement on increased rights of the Pact’s Supreme
Commander in war time. Following Ceausescu’s return from Moscow,
the Romanian Communist Party Politburo met on November 24 to
discuss the results of the meeting. Describing for the Politburo the
Moscow meeting, Romanian Prime Minister Manea Manescu portrayed
Kulikov’s report as a result of Soviet “militarist circles” created “for

Romania
the purpose of justifying the arms race, the so-called need to allocate
high investments, to change the armaments in all of the sectors [of the
economy] as soon as possible, and to involve the economic potential
of all [Warsaw Pact] countries taking part in this arms race.” (Minutes of
the Political Executive Committee of the Romanian Communist Party,
November 24, 1978; Romanian National Archives, CC RCP Chancellery
Files, 89/1978. Published by the Cold War International History Project)
While agreeing to continue living by its commitments under the 1955
Charter, the Politburo decided to continue to oppose what it saw as
Soviet attempts to interfere in its internal affairs through demands for
increased control, and to publicize its positions on military matters
and increase of military expenditures, an unprecedented airing of War-
saw Pact internal disagreements.
Ceausescu “orchestrated public explanation and support from RCP
Political Executive Committee and delegations from all social categories
beginningwithworkers,”theEmbassyinBucharestreportedintelegram
vak invasion atmosphere,” Ceausescu’s performance, the Embassy
wrote, “will do [him] no harm with Romanian population.” (National
December 1 speech, reported by the Embassy in telegram 8603, Decem-
ber 1, “placed Romania’s differences with Warsaw Pact allies on formal
public record in a context designed to demonstrate maximum national
unity behind him.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
File, D780496–0373)
In telegram 8758 from Bucharest, December 7, the Embassy
described Ceausescu’s actions as the result of “serious policy differ-
ences with Romania’s formal allies.” Ceausescu, the Embassy contin-
ued, was likely “under considerable pressure in the weeks leading up
to the Warsaw Pact summit.” Ceausescu’s decision to go public, the
Embassy reported, was a calculated gamble to elicit: “a) sympathy
and support from the West, China, and others; b) genuine Romanian
national unity around Ceausescu; and c) a chance to expand substan-
tially Romania’s maneuvering room on foreign policy at one blow
rather than by the usual small incremental steps.” The Embassy con-
cluded that Ceausescu “may see an old and sick leadership in Moscow
and the start of a succession struggle there, a Soviet Union deeply
absorbed in SALT negotiations with the United States and profoundly
concerned by a revitalized and outward-looking China, and a collection
of East European states, who, to a greater or lesser extent, are reluctant
allies of the Soviets and which may not-so-secretly share some of Roma-
nia’s points of view. In such a situation, small states can move decisively
and successfully against big ones, and Ceausescu has moved.” “Any
statement or other clear indication of U.S. support for Romanian inde-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
pendence would be especially effective and appreciated at this time,”
Aggrey suggested. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
File, D780505–0012)
In the context of increasingly public disagreements between Bucha-
rest and Moscow, the Carter administration faced the challenge of
responding to the increased Soviet pressure on Romania at a time when
its own relations with Bucharest were strained by the Pacepa affair in
particular and human rights disagreements in general. While Corneliu
Bogdan, Director of the Foreign Ministry Directorate for the Western
Hemisphere, was in Washington to negotiate a new cultural exchange
agreement, the idea of a high-level visit to Romania to underscore
Washington’s support crystallized. Since Secretary of Commerce W.
Michael Blumenthal was in Moscow as part of a European tour, the
Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs, Zbigniew Brze-
zinski, informed him of President Carter’s desire that he visit Bucharest.
(Telegram WH81569 to Moscow, December 5; Carter Library, National
Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 7, Backchannel
menthal by backchannel message that “the President very willingly
approved my recommendation that you be asked to go,” and that “the
Romanians understand and welcome the political point of your visit
and will be receiving you as a Presidential emissary in this light.”
Brzezinski also notified Blumenthal that Stephen Larrabee of the
National Security Council Staff would be joining his party in Bonn
prior to the departure for Bucharest. (Carter Library, National Security
In telegram 308284 to Bonn, Moscow, and Bucharest, the Department
informed Secretary Blumenthal that his visit to Romania was a show
of support for Bucharest’s “constructive role in international affairs,”
and that the White House, would make a “low key announcement of
visit at the regular press briefing Thursday, December 7.” (National
announcement, see Public Papers: Carter, 1978, Book II, page 2187.

Romania
211.
Memorandum From Stephen Larrabee of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, December 10, 1978
SUBJECT
Summary Report on Secretary Blumenthal’s Trip to Romania, December 8–9,
1978 (U)
Secretary Blumenthal is preparing a report for the President on his
trip to Romania and his discussions while in Bucharest.2 However, I
thought it might be useful for me to give you a brief summary of the
trip and some of my own impressions. (U)
Bonn, December 7–8
Shortly after arriving, I was called to the American Embassy to
brief Secretary Blumenthal on the background and purpose of his trip
to Romania. Initially he was a bit concerned about how the trip would
be viewed in Moscow and its impact on the improved atmosphere
in US–Soviet relations which had been evident during his talks with
Brezhnev and Kosygin several days previously. He felt that some men-
tion should be made of the economic aspects of his trip, as this was
his main responsibility. Moreover, the Romanians themselves had sug-
gested that the trip should be billed as an exchange on economic as
well as political matters.3 He also suggested some changes in the text
of his arrival statement, including the elimination of the word “inde-
tialed copy.
2 Secretary Blumenthal’s report has not been found. Blumenthal did prepare a
memorandum of conversation of his meeting with Andrei during the December 8 recep-
tion. Andrei discussed the Warsaw Pact meeting describing it as “extremely difficult”
because of the differences between Bucharest and Moscow on defense budgets, relations
with the PRC, and the Camp David Accords. Concerning Soviet pressure on Romania,
Andrei told Blumenthal that the Romanians “judged the risk to be small. Militarily, he
said, ‘we are not Czechoslovakia’ and ‘we have made certain preparations and would
be ready.’ Economic pressures, if they occur, would cause some difficulty but Romania
could handle them.” (Ibid.)
forwarded cleared Bucharest remarks for Blumenthal. The statement stressed that he
was visiting Romania at President Carter’s direction to reaffirm “the importance we
attach to Romania’s independence and to U.S.-Romanian friendship.” The visit was also to
highlight “the value we place on the constructive role that Romania plays in international
thal responded to the White House in telegram 22376 from Bonn, December 7, suggesting

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
pendent” in the first paragraph of the text.4 I resisted this change,
arguing that (1) it would weaken the initial impact of his statement;
(2) the statement had been cleared by you and I therefore could not
make such changes. He thereupon suggested calling you personally,
which he did. You know the results. (C)
After briefing the Secretary on the purposes of his trip and giving
him the general background to recent developments within the Warsaw
Pact, I attended several meetings at the West German MFA, which the
American Embassy had set up. The first was with Dr. Kuehn, Director
for Soviet Affairs in the Foreign Office. The discussion, conducted in
German, centered on Soviet-West German relations, their present state
and future development. While useful, the conversation provided no
new key insights but rather served to confirm already held impressions.
The same was true of my meeting with Dr. Joetze, Director for East-
West Affairs in the Foreign Office. That evening, I had dinner with
Dick Smyser, the DCM at the Embassy and a good friend of Bill Grif-
fith’s, who had served on the NSC twice under Kissinger. I departed
the following morning for Bucharest. (U)
Bucharest, December 8
After making his initial arrival statement, which was well received
by the Romanians, Secretary Blumenthal held a half-hour meeting with
Romanian Foreign Minister Stefan Andrei. This was more of a protocol
meeting than anything else and served essentially as a forum for Blu-
menthal to make some of the talking points, though in abbreviated
form. (My notes of the meeting are at Tab C.)5 (C)
The real substantive discussions took place in a private tête-à-tête
meeting between Andrei and Blumenthal during cocktails before din-
ner. The Secretary has prepared a report of this discussion for the
President, which you should see. The Secretary showed this report to
me, and with his permission, I have included the highlights here for
you (Tab D). (C)6
During the pre-dinner cocktails, while Andrei was talking to Blu-
menthal, Mitran, the former DCM in Washington and now Andrei’s
special assistant, pulled me aside for a private discussion. His main
urging Blumenthal to drop the words “Romania’s independence” from the opening
paragraph of his Bucharest statement, since that phrase might strike the Soviets as
“signaling US intent to split Romania away.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
Policy File, P850061–1892)
5 Tab C is attached but not printed. The Embassy in Bucharest reported the conversa-
tion to the Department of the Treasury in telegram 8829, December 12. (National Archives,
6 Tab D is attached but not printed. See footnote 2 above.

Romania
purpose was to hammer home the point that has been made by almost
every Romanian official in the past two weeks: the need for a recon-
sideration of the NATO commitment to a 3 percent increase in defense
spending, because this is being used by the Soviet Union to justify
increases in the Warsaw Pact defense budget. In response to a question
about Ceausescu’s reference in his December 1st speech to “counter
revolutionary activity” of some socialist states—which many in the
West saw as an indication of an attempt by Moscow to form a fifth
column in Romania—Mitran said that this was a reference not to Roma-
nia but to the Soviet Union’s use of Vietnam as a proxy against China.
He also voiced concern about “alarmist” Western press reports which
only served to make things worse for Romania. This was not Czechoslo-
vakia, he emphasized. The Romanians knew what they were doing;
they were not about to commit suicide. They knew the limits. However,
within these limits they intended to stand firm.7 (S)
It was obvious that our discussion, like Andrei’s conversation with
Blumenthal, had not occurred by chance but had been carefully
planned, and that as “your” representative, I had been singled out by
Mitran for a message he hoped would be conveyed directly to you. (C)
The official meeting with Andrei was followed by another official
meeting with Cornel Burtica, the Minister of Foreign Trade, and a team
of financial experts.8 The discussion, much of it quite technical, revolved
around economic matters. Burtica made a strong pitch for MFN on a
permanent basis and more US credits, arguing that the best guarantee
of independence was a strong economy. He also asked for expediting
export licenses. Blumenthal made no commitments but simply reiter-
ated the basic desire of the US to expand economic relations with
Romania in areas where this was mutually beneficial. He also gave
Burtica a briefing on President Carter’s inflation program and its rela-
tionship to the stability of the dollar—a matter of great interest to
Romania since 70 percent of Romanian foreign trade is in dollars. The
Secretary also gave Burtica a rundown of his recent trip to the Middle
East and expressed his concern about developments in Iran. Interest-
ingly, Burtica said that Romania agreed with the US position regarding
the Shah. It did not want to see anarchy or a vacuum in Iran and
7 Responding to December 8 reports in the Austrian daily Kronen-Zeitung suggesting
that the Czechoslovak Ambassador in Bucharest was engaged in an effort to overthrow
Ceausescu at Soviet behest, the Embassy in Bucharest reported in telegram 8859, Decem-
ber 13, that there was no evidence to support the story. Nevertheless, the Embassy
expected the story to continue to surface. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
Policy File, D780517–1037)
meeting with Burtica. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
favored a stabilization of the Shah’s position. In fact, they were trying
to help by giving Iran some diesel oil, which it had requested. (S)
Meeting between Blumenthal and Ceausescu, December 9
The next day the Secretary met with Ceausescu for a discussion
which lasted about one and a half hours. Besides myself, present were
Romanian Foreign Minister Andrei and US Ambassador Aggrey. My
notes of the discussion are at Tab B.9 After Blumenthal presented the
talking points, Ceausescu made a long speech in which he: (C)
—noted the improvement of Romanian-US relations recently, and
expressed his strong desire to see relations further broadened, espe-
cially in the economic field. (However, he only obliquely referred to
MFN, in part because this had been so extensively covered by Burtica
in his talks with Blumenthal the day before); (S)
—made a strong pitch for increased efforts towards disarmament
both in SALT and MBFR. In this regard, he called for a re-examination
of the decision taken at the May Summit to increase NATO defense
expenditures by 3 percent; (S)
—called for a global solution to the Middle East talks and appealed
for a convocation of the Geneva conference with the participation of
Jordan, Syria and the Palestinians. This would diminish the danger of
Egypt’s isolation, which he saw as increasing; (S)10
—noted Ethiopia’s willingness to grant Eritrea a degree of autonomy
within the framework of a unified Ethiopian state, and the desire of the
Ethiopian leadership to expand economic relations with the US; (S)
—reiterated his country’s firm determination to continue to pursue
an independent policy, while remaining a member of the Warsaw
General Assessment
The visit was an important symbol of US support for Romania’s
independent policy and was greatly appreciated by the Romanians.
While the symbolic significance of the visit was in many ways more
important than the substance of many of the meetings, the trip offered
a useful opportunity to gain a clearer understanding of the dimensions
of the dispute and the issues that contributed to it. (C)
Unfortunately, there was little time to discuss the events of the
past weeks with the US Ambassador or the Embassy staff, whose
substantive reporting has been of a generally high quality. Such discus-
sions at some point would be quite useful. In fact the Ambassador
9 Attached but not printed. The Embassy reported on the conversation in telegram
File, D780509–0095)
10 Ceausescu made the same points in his September 23 letter to President Carter
which was delivered by Foreign Minister Andrei to Brzezinski on September 30. See
footnote 2, Document 208.

Romania
expressed his desire for me to extend my stay for this purpose. While
this proved impossible this time, a field trip at a later date—per-
haps combined with stopovers in Warsaw and Budapest—is worth
considering. (C)
The Romanians were obviously very appreciative of the trip and
US support generally. (Indeed, as Blumenthal stepped off the plane on
arrival, Mitran, Andrei’s Special Assistant, acted like a cheshire cat
who had just swallowed a canary.) The visit received substantial press
treatment, though the Romanians were careful not to overdo it. Despite
his initial reservations, the Secretary proved to be an effective and
skillful envoy. He was open and businesslike in his presentations and
quickly established good rapport with all his discussion partners. I was
particularly impressed with his quick learning curve and his intuitive
political judgment. (C)
How the Soviets will react to the visit is difficult to determine at
this point. While its symbolic significance will hardly be lost on them,
I doubt that they will react too strongly publicly. Privately, they will
probably take the Romanians to task for it. But whatever their irritation,
it is hardly going to affect their basic attitude toward outstanding US-
Soviet bilateral issues such as SALT. They will continue to give these
priority while trying to paper-over differences with Romania. (C)
The Romanians clearly feel it is in their long-run interest to be able
to demonstrate as broad a range of support as possible, even if this
intensifies Moscow’s momentary ire. They have made a carefully calcu-
lated gamble and are confident that they can handle the situation. They
do not, however, intend to push too hard. But they are determined to
maintain, and where possible expand, the bounds of autonomy. (C)
Within this framework, they are likely to look to the US for concrete
signs of support, especially in the economic field, as a means of reducing
their dependence on Moscow and decreasing their vulnerability to
Soviet pressure. We ought therefore to think carefully about the de-
gree of support and encouragement we are willing to give them and
its potential impact on other relationships, particularly those with

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
212.
Telegram From the Embassy in Romania to the Department
of State1
138. Subject: Romanian Vulnerabilities and Soviet Leverage.
1. Introduction. There has been considerable speculation in recent
weeks since Ceausescu’s well-publicized policy differences with Roma-
nia’s Warsaw Pact allies as to the kind and extent of leverage the Soviet
Union can exert on Romania to influence Romanian behavior and where
Romania’s vulnerabilities lie. We have focused particularly on the
middle range between totally ignoring Romanian “deviations” to out-
right Czechoslovakia-style military invasion. Following is an initial
Country Team attempt to compile and assess areas, actual or potential,
where Soviets could exert leverage on Romania. We would appreciate
comments, particularly from Washington Intelligence Community.2
2. Political
A. Assassination of Ceausescu
As symbol of Romanian defiance of Soviet desires, one could argue
that physical removal of Ceausescu could well serve Soviet interests.
However, we consider such a move alone as unlikely since there is no
clear indication of what leader or leaders would come to power under
these circumstances and there is no guarantee that a post-Ceausescu
leadership would be any more amenable to Soviet influence than he
is. Nevertheless, assassination could be a viable option as part of an
overall Soviet plan to invade Romania and/or to install a pro-Soviet
faction in the Romanian leadership as was done in Czechoslovakia.
We note that, while we may not take a possible assassination attempt
against Ceausescu too seriously, apparently he does, since he is known
to demand thorough and rigorous personal security at all times.
Secret. Sent for information to DIA, Belgrade, East Berlin, Bonn, Brussels, Budapest,
London, Madrid, Moscow, Paris, Beijing, Prague, Rome, Sofia, USNATO, and Warsaw.
Embassy that it found the telegram stimulating and will be discussing it with members
of the Intelligence Community. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
that following the January 18 meeting chaired by the NIO for the Soviet Union and
Eastern Europe, the judgment of the Intelligence Community was that “barring radical
new external events that could change the Soviet calculus of cost and benefit, it is unlikely
the Soviets would accept the costs entailed by measures drastic enough to bring Ceausescu

Romania
B. Formation of a Pro-Soviet Faction
We must assume that one continuing goal of Soviet policy here is
to identify and encourage Romanians in such key organizations as the
Party, military, and security services to adopt pro-Soviet views and
prepare for or engage in pro-Soviet activities, albeit clandestinely.
Although neither we nor our Romanian sources can identify even
incipient pro-Soviet individuals, factions, or cliques does not mean
they do not exist: Case of General Serb a few years ago may have
involved something of the sort and recent brouhaha in Western and
Czechoslovakia media concerning Ambassador Hanak’s activities here
suggest option is by no means dead in all scenarios. In a true crisis
situation, we would expect such persons to surface, probably joined
by the opportunists spawned by any society ready to sell themselves
in return for money or power. There is some indication that Soviets
would seek to exploit fertile ground among some “pragmatic” Romani-
ans who see no material advantage in terms of rising internal standards
of living stemming from Romania’s independent foreign policy and
who point to countries like Hungary and even Bulgaria where foreign
policy obedience to Soviets has brought a degree of material benefits
in return. Still, we believe that anti-Sovietism is so deeply ingrained in
Romanian populace and particularly those holding leadership positions
that a pro-Soviet group would have little influence and could be sus-
tained in power only at the point of a Soviet gun.
C. Internal Subversion
Soviets could seek to foment gross dissatisfaction with Ceausescu’s
internal policies and its conversion into political action, resulting in
internal chaos of type Iran is presently experiencing. Potentially, Roma-
nia is particularly vulnerable to economic disruption and to dissidence
among the some two million ethnic Hungarians living mostly in Tran-
sylvania. Yet to date, while there is considerable complaining about
shortages of goods and glacially rising living standards as well as
audible grumbling among the Hungarians about perceived second-
class status, there is no indication that this discontent has reached point
where it will spill over into overt organized political action, or any
real indication that Soviets are seeking to foment such discontent in
spite of near-universal Romanian belief to the contrary. Engendering
internal chaos or ethnic hatreds is dangerous strategy with unforeseen
outcomes, especially in Communist countries with common land bor-
ders with Soviet Union, which has its own problems in just these
problem areas, and we doubt Soviets would go very far down this
road even though Romania could be torn apart on either count. We
do not see how a Romania in shambles would serve Soviet interests,
except as a prelude to invasion.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
D. Discrediting and Isolating Ceausescu
We see this “containment strategy” as most likely Soviet course of
political action, first signs of which began appearing after Hua Kuo-
feng visit here in August and intensified in wake of Warsaw Pact
summit imbroglio in late November. Ceausescu is vulnerable to attacks
from “orthodox” Communists on his leadership style, cult of personal-
ity, his pretensions to world leadership, widespread corruption among
his underlings, foreign policy “deviations,” defections of key personnel,
and a variety of other real and imagined items. Soviets and their friends
have already expended some effort in this direction, both in bilateral
whispering campaigns attacking Ceausescu’s “demagoguery” and his
“erratic” personality and in such multilateral fora as recent Sofia ideo-
logical meeting on “real socialism” where Romanians and a few others
from Eurocommunist parties were isolated from “mainstream” of the
over 70 parties represented there. This effort could easily increase and
could go so far as to include intensive pressure in interparty fora to
condemn Ceausescu as an ideological deviationist as well as to rally
pro-Soviet friends in Third World to discredit Romanian efforts in
this arena. Further, since every political leader undoubtedly has some
skeletons in his personal closet, it is reasonable to assume that Soviets
know or could find out what some of them are and publicly air them,
to Ceausescu’s severe personal and professional embarrassment. A
concerted campaign of disinformation and ridicule could fill in any
missing links. Net result, however, could well make Ceausescu even
more stubborn and tenacious on policy level without seriously threaten-
ing his hold on power. At level of ideology and dogma, Romanian
defensive positions are already well prepared by years of dogged insist-
ence on confirming and reconfirming common foreign policy “princi-
ples” with all and sundry “Socialists.” On another level, given centuries
of experience in Balkan politics, we have full confidence in Romanians
to hold their own in any back-alley in-fighting, aided and abetted by
such parties as Chinese, Spanish, and Japanese. In short, while such a
campaign would be extremely unpleasant, Ceausescu and company
could live with it, and probably win an even greater measure of Western
and Third World sympathy to boot. Nor do we believe that it would
be in Soviet interest to carry campaign to point that Ceausescu is
painted as either an unredeemable pariah or a hopeless buffoon since
he does, after all, rule a country which is of some strategic importance
to Soviet Union and some influence and reputation with variety of
countries and parties, including ruling parties, across face of globe.
3. Economic
The various steps that the Soviet Union might consider, supposing
it were interested in bringing pressure to bear on Romania, are:
1. Reducing imports and exports, either overall or selectively;

Romania
2. Launching a propaganda campaign designed to undermine con-
fidence in Romania’s financial and economic reputation. Such a cam-
paign could be focused on the international community and/or on the
Romanian population itself;
3. Undertaking to encourage, solicit or force allied or friendly coun-
tries to join in economic actions against Romania.
A. Trade
Two-way trade between the Soviet Union and Romania constitutes
some 17 percent of Romania’s total trade activity. Although this figure
is large, reflecting the fact that the Soviet Union is Romania’s largest
single trading partner, it is not so large that complete disruption of
two-way trade would necessarily result in anything other than short-
term, if dramatic, dislocations. It is generally agreed that the global
figures mask special situations and sensitivities: Romania imports no
Soviet petroleum but is dependent to a large extent on the USSR for
coking coal and iron ore. The trend, however, has been one of decreas-
ing dependency in general and specific declines in percentage terms
of these two raw materials. Since this is a key point, a bit of elaboration
is probably useful.
The effect of a complete cutoff of trade between the two countries
would force Romania to undertake a crash program, supplementing its
existing policy of diversification of sources for imports of raw materials.
Existing commodity markets are such that coal and iron ore, for
instance, could be picked up quite quickly, although most probably at
a premium price if deliveries had to be made urgently. Over the longer
run, it is doubtful that the prices Romania would have to pay for these
raw materials would be substantially higher than those paid now to
the Soviet Union since they are pegged to Western market prices.
The placing of Romanian exports would probably be somewhat more
problematic. Something like a billion and a half dollars worth of goods
are involved. In the short run, that loss could be swallowed. In the
longer run, it could have, among other effects, that of inducing the
production of goods more acceptable in other markets.
A real possibility is selective cuts in trade such as simply holding
up shipments of replacement parts for Romanian factories which use
predominantly Russian-manufactured machinery. This kind of thing
could be done without much fuss and give rise to a whole set of
important, if temporary, dislocations.
B. Disinformation
The functioning of any economy is based on a set of relationships
imbued with a certain level of credibility. This fact of economic life is
particularly evident in the financial world, where rumors of currency
devaluation or looming bankruptcy can have a positively self-fulfilling

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
effect. The same thing applies to less sensitive areas of economic life,
particularly in a country devoted to the suppression of economic facts,
and thus to the creation of myth, rumor and unhealthy ignorance. The
effects of a policy effectively denying the general populace much hard
information on economic reality is at least two sided: Untutored pessi-
mism concerning the future is chronic in the Romanian masses; on the
other hand, and illustrative of a general advantage of manipulation of
news, the GOR, through clever publicity of the Pitesti refinery accident,
has induced savings in consumption well beyond those merited by the
magnitude of the accident. This raises a general point about the ability
of anyone to engage in effective disinformation activities: Overuse and
abuse, the effect of any increase in the level of any campaign would
be hard to predict. Romanian’s since [sense?] of truth and language has
been brutalized to such a degree that the utility of further brutalization
of fact or language might well be triflingly marginal.
This observation also would bear on any disinformation campaign
launched by other Socialist states: having criticized Romania’s system
of economic development and management so severely (albeit pri-
vately) and for so long, credibility is low. The vast and even hopeless
mismanagement of their own economic affairs also tends to make
listeners rather skeptical.
C. Joint Action
The possibility of inducing other COMECON members to join in
economic sanctions, whether so labelled or not, does not seem very
real at this point. It should be noted, however, that the effect of serious
cuts in trade between all members of COMECON and Romania would
be positively devastating. The notion that it is not a realistic possibility
is based in logic, not information. There is no doubt that the lack of
symmetry in relations between members of COMECON, particularly
between the USSR and all other members, collectively or individually,
is gross, increasing and constitutes a most difficult and sensitive issue.
Illustration: Poland’s reaction to a suggestion or directive that it cut
coal supplies to Romania is highly unpredictable. It would run into
political imponderables, such as are involved in all relations between
super and small powers, as well as bump up against one of the inherent
weaknesses of the non-market economy system, i.e., the system is
turgid, slow to react and in general inflexible. Poland could certainly
place the coal elsewhere, but how well could it get along without the
Romanian imports it currently receives in return? While Bulgaria might
go along with trade cuts, total or selective, the reaction of all other
states, who may frequently have been “silent partners” in Romanian
dissenting positions within COMECON and WP conferences, might
be nastier than generally imagined and begin a process of unravelling
of intra-COMECON bilateral trade arrangements and balances that

Romania
would be difficult to control. The Romanian disease might spread—
even dangerously—as an effect of measures to quarantine it. Less hypo-
thetically, there has been no indication of EE reluctance to continue,
or even to expand economic exchanges with Romania in post-Warsaw
Pact summit period of negotiations of trade protocols.
The other (non-EE) client states of the Soviet Union typically have
only token economic relations with Romania. Other states with consid-
erable Soviet influence most probably would not agree to cutting back
on mutually beneficial economic relations.
In economic terms, trade is the single area in which potentially
effective levels exist. Financial arrangements between Socialist coun-
tries appear to provide little room for leverage. This is so because
financial accounts are typically settled over a medium-term period of
not more than [five] years, and there is a good deal of attention to
balancing as one goes along. This is certainly so in Romania’s case.
The remaining area, economic cooperation, has been one of particular
sensitivity to Romanians for the last 20 years. For all practical purposes,
Romania has refused to undertake joint manufacturing ventures which
would make any part of their economy permanently dependent on
inputs from any other Socialist country. In some cases, they have
entered into such ventures, but only with agreement that the arrange-
ment be temporary, pending the development of Romania’s ability to
produce the item independently (articulated busses from Hungary,
etc.). If there is a single weakness in the Romanian economic scene
which is truly remarkable, it is this urge to autarchy. Romania’s true
enemies would egg them on in their mania of producing everything
from widgets to BAC 1–11s, RR motors, and kitchen utensils.
The ambivalent effect of economic boycotts are well known. In the
case of economic boycott of Romania, selective or total, there surely
would be strange political effects, too. In the short term, for instance,
the FRG would probably fill a large part of any economic gap. It is
close, it is highly responsive economically, and might harbor some
sort of sympathy. Would the Soviets favor renewal of greater German
economic/political influence in this part of the world? The Chinese
would feel compelled to put up more than posters on liberty wall.
China trade is big now, and presumably could be swelled, at least
temporarily, to fill unanticipated gaps in deliveries of, for example, coal.
4. Science and Technology
A. Training
The Romanians and the Soviets have a history of cooperation in
S&T area dating from end of WWII. Many thousands of Romanian
scientists and technicians were trained in the USSR and indeed, Roman-
ian industrial development owes much to Soviets in this regard. How-
ever, since the mid-60’s the Romanians have moved towards the West

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
for the technology they need and for a number of years (five or six)
were sending a considerable number of Romanians to the U.S. and
other Western nations for education and training. This has now tapered
off, though there is a steady flow of Romanians who go to U.S. and
elsewhere on short visits in a number of technological rather than
scientific areas. In short, the Romanians no longer rely on the Soviets
for training or technology and in some areas are their peers.
B. New Technology
There is no P&T area (except military weaponry) where the Roman-
ians have not protected themselves from Soviet leverage by developing
ties with other non-CEMA countries. In nuclear area, Romanians have
opted for Canadian type reactor (CANDU) which uses natural uranium
for fuel. Romania does have some uranium. Deal with Canadians pro-
vides for fuel and heavy water. Thus, Romanians have effectively insu-
lated and isolated themselves from USSR and other CEMA nations
which are building the Soviet light water reactor. This is not to say
that Romanians do not benefit from their S&T agreement with Soviets,
only that it is not critical enough for the latter to use as an effective lever.
5. Military
A. On the extreme end of the spectrum, the Soviet Union has the
military capability to intervene in Romania, depose Ceausescu, and
install a regime subservient to Soviet interests. However, we consider
such a course of action as highly unlikely except under the gravest of
circumstances. Ceausescu has shown himself to be a master of judging
limits of Soviet tolerance and not exceeding them, and we have no
reason to expect that in the future he will either so grossly violate these
limits or so lose control of internal events as to trigger a Soviet military
takeover. Further, for years Romanians have diligently been seeking
to up the CTT to Soviets of any blatant misbehavior toward Romania—
hyperactivity in UN and other international fora, courtship of Third
World, close and increasing ties with the West, excellent relations with
all shades of Communist and other “progressive” forces, doctrine of
a people’s war against “any” foreign aggressor. How much of this is
bluff is impossible to gauge, and how effective all of this would be in
deterring Soviets in a real crunch is open to question. Nevertheless,
Romanian message is quite clear—there would be no free ride for Red
(or any other) Army into Bucharest, and costs of such action in terms
of wider interest would outweigh any limited benefits attained thereby.
B. In a Yugoslav-Bulgarian agitation or Yugoslav invasion scenario,
Soviet units could move rapidly via the Odessa-Varna ferry route.
However, first commitments would probably be airborne and air trans-
portable units which can move on short order to any point in Balkans.
Important point in this scenario is that while Soviets have more open
capability to avoid transitting Romania, they probably would not. If

Romania
moving to aid Bulgarians against Yugoslavs, why not kill two birds
with one stone and roll the tanks over Romania? In this case, logistics
support troops must be stationed in Romania which would amount to
occupation force.
C. While Romanian military pledges undying allegiance to Ceau-
sescu, and while he has a good track record in capturing and keeping
military support in internal politics, possibility that Soviets can estab-
lish faction in military favorable to their interest should not be excluded.
It may be harder to find pro-Soviets in military than in party, but, on
other hand, decades of close cooperation have left their mark, and
Romanian military weakness in any confrontation scenario will pre-
sumably incline some officers to join where they cannot resist. The
emergence of a pro-Soviet faction is of course most likely in case of
military intervention, but could also take place as result of severe
discreditation campaign against Ceausescu.
D. In military/economic sphere, Ceausescu would not hesitate to
throw most of the military into an economic endeavor such as mining
if shortages and strikes emerged. He has a sizable labor force potential
in the military.
E. Romania is vulnerable in its military supply relationship with
Soviet Union. Romania’s weapons and equipment inventory are all
Soviet except for some Shanghai class patrol boats. If the Soviet Union
and other Warsaw Pact country suppliers closed the valve, Romanian
military capability to conduct and sustain any type of operation would
be sorely limited. For example, MiG aircraft (and the Romanians report-
edly have the latest MiG–23’s) require huge inventories of spares [gar-
ble—across board?] the entire system (aircraft plus control radars plus
weapons). The Soviets can effectively control utilization through their
supply systems. The Romanians now seek to overcome this depend-
ency. Hence come efforts to produce ground support aircraft (Jurom),
tanks (improved version of Soviet T–55’s), artillery, small arms and
ammunition with Yugoslavia. At best, however, Romanian efforts
amount to “improved obsolesence.”
6. Conclusion
A. Although Romania and Ceausescu are vulnerable on such ques-
tions as ethnic Hungarian discontent and internal economic disruption,
we currently see no indications that the Soviets are using these vulnera-
bilities to try to influence Romanian behavior. Likewise we do not
believe other Romanian vulnerabilities such as military supply depend-
ence on Soviet Union and relative isolation within that portion of world
Communist movement controlled by Soviets, can be translated into
effective leverage for the Soviets to influence Romanian behavior. Con-
sequently, Soviet expressions of displeasure and anger over Romanian
bearbaiting probably ring rather hollow to Ceausescu. He must realize

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
that, with a few exceptions, there is relatively little that Soviets can do
to exert the kind of intolerable pressure to which Romanians must bend.
B. Finally, not even the most hard-line Soviet ideologist can claim
that Ceausescu is other than an orthodox Communist who is in no
way “soft on capitalism,” and that he and his Communist Party are
not in total control of all aspects of Romanian life, as Dubcek and his
colleagues were not. Kinds of things Ceausescu espouses in his foreign
policy “deviations”—disarmament, a more equitable distribution of
world resources, Third World causes—are items which Soviets can
hardly disavow and in fact do vow. Ceausescu’s genius is in exploiting
gap between Soviet rhetoric and actual behavior.
C. While this is clearly uncomfortable and annoying to Soviets, it
is not yet dangerous enough to them that they have begun—at least
as far as we can see—to take steps (plotting assassination or a military
invasion, forming a pro-Soviet faction, fomenting unrest among the
Hungarian minority or intentionally severely disrupting Romania’s
economy) that could lead to Ceausescu’s downfall. The reason for this,
we believe, is that Ceausescu has been careful not to confront Soviets
on a question they would see as vital to their national security (e.g.
leaving the Warsaw Pact). It could be, however, that Ceausescu’s recent
further tilt toward China (a country about which the Soviets are para-
noid) and his advocacy of no increase in Warsaw Pact defense expendi-
tures have moved him perilously close to areas which the Soviets do
see as vital to their national security.
D. Also it should not be forgotten that Ceausescu also needs the
Soviets, both as ultimate military guarantor for maintaining a Commu-
nist system in Romania and as an object to bait in international arena
to increase his domestic political position as a Romanian nationalist
leader.
E. Consequently, we forsee no basic change in this relationship,
even given periods of rather intense strain such as the present, barring
a gross and unlikely miscalculation by either side.
Aggrey

Romania
213.
Telegram From the Embassy in Romania to the Department
of State1
3629. Subject: Vulnerability of Ceausescu Regime to Destabilizing
Forces or Events. Ref: State 38873.2
1. (S-entire text).
2. Summary: We conclude that Ceausescu administration in Roma-
nia is facing no challenge so severe as to threaten regime stability now
or in immediate future and that so far it has demonstrated the requisite
flexibility to defuse successfully those pressing problems that require
response. Principal internal stains stem from total centralization of
party/state power and forced-draft program of rapid industrialization,
but to date (except in isolated instances) economic discontent has not
been translated into overt protest or other political action, and we do
not expect that it will do so. Conflict could arise if, in 1985 when
Romania is supposed to attain “medium-developed” status thereby
vitiating regime demands for continued sacrifice, relaxation of tight
controls and provision of visible and significant material benefits does
not ensue. Groups with ability to cause most significant internal disrup-
tion are the sizeable ethnic Hungarian minority and an increasingly
class-conscious industrial proletariat, followed by a sullen internal
security apparatus. Several social problems may also force themselves
into forefront, including redefinition of tradeoff between personal com-
petency and political reliability for rising professional/technical group
and resolution of centuries-old abysmal situation of gypsies. Finally,
we see no significant external forces or actors which presently affect
Romanian internal affairs, although Hungary and Soviet Union could
exert destabilizing influences. In unlikely event of outright Soviet mili-
tary invasion, all bets are off. End summary.
Internal Political and Social Strains
3. Principal internal strains faced by Ceausescu regime stem from
centralization of state and party power and forced-draft program of
rapid industrialization which GOR has been pursuing for at least fifteen
years and which is designed to make Romania a “medium-developed”
nation by 1985. Willful political decision was made to forego any rapid
increase in living standards and material consumption in favor of
accumulation and reinvestment (approximately one-third of national
Roger Channel.
2 Not found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
income in 1978), and this decision has been pursued relentlessly.
Regime believes, possibly correctly, that necessary concomitant is what
Ceausescu terms “order and discipline”, i.e. maximum party/state
direction of the process and control over social forces unleashed by
modernization process to avoid any disruption of maximum national
effort required for rapid development in a hostile world. Net result
is a paternalistic authoritarian state whose official rhetoric is heavily
flavored with appeals to all to produce and over-produce for the sake
of the country and future generations, and whose repressive apparatus
stands ready and is occasionally used to coerce recalcitrants into line.
4. While inefficiencies, misallocations, and uncertainties of indus-
trialization program have triggered massive grumbling, apathy, malin-
gering, passive sabotage and corruption among Romanian populace,
except in such isolated instances as the Jiu Valley coalminers strike in
August 1977, economic discontent has not to date been translated into
overt protest or other political action. In spite of some indications to
contrary (see labor section, para. 17), we do not believe it will do so
in foreseeable future, at least to point of endangering regime stability.
Part of explanation lies in “Romanian character” formed over centuries.
Tradition of democracy as we know it, or of citizen initiative and
individual action, is very weak here; on contrary, Romanians have
learned the hard way to accommodate to demands of whatever regime
is in power and to do the minimum necessary to keep the authorities
off their backs. It is the ability of Romanians to outwit, distort, and
subvert government edicts that makes life human and livable under this
and previous regimes. In short, this is a nation of survivors, not heroes.
5. Massive economic failure caused either by domestic mismanage-
ment, which we view as unlikely, or by external factors would create
a new and much more explosive situation, especially if living standards
actually began to drop instead of rising as they are now, albeit at a
snail’s pace. More pertinently, a GOR failure to start providing workers
and others with respite from constant government pressure upon and
supervision over individual lives as well as visible and significant
material benefits in 1985, the year Romania allegedly attains its
“medium developed” status, could also lead to important instability
unless GOR could convincingly put blame on external forces or circum-
stances such as a world-wide economic crisis.
6. Neither population growth nor urbanization constitute signifi-
cant stress factors now or in foreseeable future. The former is low in
spite of active GOR encouragement of bigger families, and the latter
is rigidly regulated through an effective system of internal migration
controls by a regime determined to avoid hazards of uncontrolled
growth.

Romania
Ceausescu’s Leadership Style
7. During the fourteen years Nicolae Ceausescu has been in power,
he has centralized decision making in his own person, extended party/
state control over all sectors and aspects of Romanian life, consolidated
his own position so that today he is the unchallenged master of the
entire party/state apparatus, moved systematically to prevent any rival
groups or persons emerging as viable contenders for power, and estab-
lished a cult of personality unrivaled within Warsaw Pact area in its
extent and intensity since Stalin. Such a picture has led some observers
that Ceausescu has thus isolated himself from Romanian reality, is
insensitive to changing conditions, and may therefore be unable to
cope successfully with future destabilizing forces and events.
8. We do not agree. We view Ceausescu as an extremely able and
pragmatic politician who has shown the requisite flexibility, including
concessions and backtracking when necessary, to defuse potentially
explosive situations (e.g. Jiu Valley), maintain power, overcome opposi-
tion, and advance his own policies. Strategies to meet new challenges
are today being incorporated into preliminary planning for Quinquen-
nial Party Congress scheduled for late 1979. Role he has defined for
himself is the classic one of enlightened but absolute despot, and Roma-
nia has had predominately despotic governments since time immemo-
rial, although many rulers were neither enlightened nor Romanian.
We are reliably informed that Ceausescu really does read position
papers, absorb details of projects, and listen to advice. Persons out
of favor are not purged, killed, disgraced, or otherwise turned into
martyrs, but are isolated in some honorific job with no important
functions (General Ion Ionita, Emil Bobu) or are otherwise buried in
the system (Trandafir Cocirla, Constantin Babalau); indeed, it is not
unusual to find such persons eventually returning to important posi-
tions after serious reverses in their careers (e.g. new Party Secretaries
Ilie Radulescu and Dumitru Popa). Ceausescu’s blend of fervent nation-
alism coupled with foreign policy independence and activism is still
widely endorsed by most Romanians even if it may be wearing thin for
some. Personal popularity in Western sense of public opinion ratings
of a leader’s performance is not a relevant consideration here except
within extremely broad limits, and Ceausescu’s personal standing
among populace [garble] could plummet drastically without seriously
Free Europe argued that Romania was facing a crisis of leadership, compounded by
Ceausescu’s preference for fast, immediate solutions rather than more considered
responses. (Open Society Archives, Records of Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty Research

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
affecting either his basic acceptability as despot or his ability to govern.
He is honest, works extremely hard, is omnipresent, engages in frenetic
activity (sometimes we suspect for its own sake), all of which creates
an image of concern, of things happening, and of forward movement.
Countless mass rallies and provincial trips promote what Ceausescu
terms “socialist democracy” and are designed to give important groups
and citizenry in general a sense of identification with regime and
Ceausescu personally, while total control is retained. Ceausescu has
carefully nurtured a number of separate and sometimes competing
systems to provide information from grass roots to him, result of which
is that he is probably as well informed as any ruler can be within
limitations of a 24-hour day. Yet he has also institutionalized a mecha-
nism whereby ordinary citizens can address petitions for redress of
grievances directly to him, thereby furthering the useful image that he
is just and will see that justice is done if only a way can be found to
bypass the stupid and perhaps venal advisors around him who keep
the “truth” from him. Finally, he has successfully implanted belief
among all Romanians, perhaps also wearing a little thin, that price
for Romania’s foreign policy independence from Soviets is internal
orthodoxy: While we view this as a myth and believe Ceausescu could
liberalize substantially without incurring Soviet wrath, such a premise
is extraordinarily helpful in muffling dissent and insuring the “order
and discipline” he feels necessary to achieve his ambitious economic
goals. Some senior advisors (e.g. PM Verdet, FonMin Andrei) are now
privately expressing a variant, arguing that present controls must be
maintained until economic development has been attained, and imply-
ing that realization can take place thereafter.
9. Withal, Ceausescu has his weaknesses, but we do not consider
them either singly or in combination as overly dangerous to stability
of his regime. He is vain; he can make shoot-from-the-hip snap judg-
ments and decisions which adversely affect achievement of goals he
seeks to accomplish; reliability of information on domestic develop-
ments and policy alternatives he is provided depends on candor of his
advisers, a trait his style does not encourage; his toleration of son
Nicu’s aberrations vividly illustrates adage that, in this society of
alleged equals, there are those who are more equal than others. In
his major departure from pragmatic politics, he fervently believes in
creating the new Communist man—a person technically competent to
perform in a modern economy but ideologically motivated by the tenets
of “revolutionary communism”. This is a tough task anywhere, and
more so here where Romanians have historically been generally indif-
ferent to ideologically based doctrines of human behavior; while the
education system and the creative arts have suffered, most Romanians
do not take this element seriously and have shrugged it off as a personal
idiosyncrasy of their otherwise quite rational ruler.

Romania
A Post-Ceausescu Romania
10. In any political system heavily centralized around a single
strong leader, question inevitably arises as to effect of the leader’s
disappearance. This is particularly acute for Communist systems in
which there is no agreed mechanism for transferring power from one
leader to the next. In Romania, we believe that such a transition would
be less difficult and destabilizing than in most other similar systems.
While admittedly Ceausescu has made no provision for his own succes-
sion and there are no heir apparents, there is a group of a dozen or so
third-string leaders (there is no second string) of approximately same
age (around 54), outlook and experience whom we would expect to
form a genuine, albeit temporary, collective leadership, using RCP Po-
litical Executive Committee (POLEXCO) as a framework and pledged
to carrying out the policies of the fallen leader and to honor his memory.
Mrs. Ceausescu would be a member of this group but, in spite of
her undeniably immense influence today and probably ambitions for
tomorrow, we would not expect her to inherit her husband’s mantle
since we consider her power derivative rather than autonomous. She
is also loathed by nearly all other major power actors. Eventually a
new strong leader would emerge from this group and would probably
become something like the new despot. We believe that this person is
today a full or candidate member of POLEXCO and that anyone who
is not stands no real chance of winning succession sweepstakes. We
have pointed out earlier (Bucharest 1224)4 the remarkable homogeneity,
relative youth, and excellent health of present 41 members of POLEXCO
(with a couple of exceptions), and we conclude that, barring political
accident, most of these persons will hold significant positions for the
next fifteen years. This is striking stability at the top leadership level.
Who, specifically? With due regard for hazards of prediction, we sug-
gest, Ilie Verdet, Virgil Trofin, Paul Niculescu, and Cornel Burtica
as most likely with Ion Iliescu and Gheorghe Pana as our favorite
dark horses.
Opposition Forces
11.Therearenooppositionforcestocurrentregime,eitherincountry
or expatriate, of any importance. There are probably some individuals,
including some in relatively high party/state positions, who may not
be totally enchanted with each and every policy of Ceausescu and who
pects of the Romanian Communist Party leadership. The Embassy suggested that outside
of accidents or unexpected illness, the top echelon of the party leadership was likely to
remain in power for the foreseeable future. “If they are removed,” the Embassy concluded,
“it will be because of political reasons, most likely associated with the relative favor
they enjoy with Ceausescu, rather than because of death or sickness.” (National Archives,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
would do some things differently if they had the opportunity, but we
consider it highly unlikely that any of these persons could or would
mount a challenge to Ceausescu. There are no expatriates of political
significance, and it seems to be rule here that expatriation rapidly causes
loss of whatever influence the person may have had within Romania
(e.g. dissident author Paul Goma, now neutralized and sputtering impo-
tently in Paris). Only individual of real stature not part of current regime
or neutralized by it is former Prime Minister Ion Gheorghe Maurer
who, at 77 and in fragile physical (but not mental) health, is universally
considered to be too old to play a major role in Romania’s future.
Security Forces
12. Security forces in Romania consist basically of regular military,
para-military internal security (Securitate), and uniformed police (mili-
tia). Regular military is most important and seems to accept party
control and civilian supremacy as embodied in POLEXCO and Ceau-
sescu. Military are deeply involved in internal Romanian affairs and
play a substantial and visible role in economic and social life—harvest-
ing crops, supervising construction of Danube-Black Sea Canal and
Bucharest metro, indoctrinating a largely conscript army in essentials
of nationalism/patriotism. We have looked in vain for evidence of
military’s political role and its influence upon internal decision making,
but we assume it must be substantial albeit perhaps passive. Lack of
hard information in this area is probably single biggest gap in our
knowledge of Romanian internal political dynamics.
13. Internal security forces, as distinguished from professional mili-
tary, constitute one of few potential elements of institutional disloyalty
and therefore instability. Ceausescu’s principal power rival in mid-
1960’s, Alexandru Draghici, headed this organization; after Ceausescu’s
triumph, with support from uniformed military, Draghici’s supporters
were replaced by Ceausescu loyalists and entire organization has suf-
fered a continuing and notable diminution in its power since then,
accelerated in last year by Pacepa defection. Nevertheless, internal
security forces should be considered armed and dangerous. Ceausescu
still does not trust this organization—nor is he pleased with its work,
as shown by relatively frequent and sharp Presidential criticism—and
it is kept on a short leash. In spite of general anti-Soviet bias of
most Romanians, including security officials, and constant stress
on organization’s role in preventing internal subversion, Securitate
resentment at erosion of its pre-Ceausescu status of a state within a
state, coupled with greatly reduced opportunities for personal plunder
of its members, could provide elements which Soviets or some future
Romanian contender for power could potentially mobilize and use,
although any such attempt would likely result in major and active
conflict with the military. Similarly, and decision by Ceausescu,

Romania
unlikely as it seems now, to “unleash” the Securitate would be an
invitation to conflict.
14. Militia as an organization is not now and is unlikely to be
in the future a significant power group. Nevertheless, given fact
that every hamlet in Romania has its town policeman or two,
often the only governmental authorities permanently on the scene,
acquiescence by militia in government policies is essential for internal
administration.
Mass Media
15. All Romanian mass media are totally under party and, therefore,
Ceausescu control and consequently constitute no destabilizing threat.
Because of the resulting towering dullness, incompleteness, and distor-
tion, however, Radio Free Europe (RFE) has won here the highest
percentage of listenership in any East European Country and is the
USG program with single most significant impact on Romania. RFE’s
power to make Romanians aware that there are viable alternatives to
present regime policies, even within a Communist system, as well as
its news broadcasts on domestic events not covered by Romania media,
terrifies Ceausescu regime concerning RFE’s potential to instigate,
focus, and mobilize anti-regime discontent, and causes Romanian offi-
cials even now to regard RFE as a major destabilizing force. To an
extent they are right.
Labor Groups
16. Official labor organizations are totally tame and are under
complete party/state control; their only real function is to act as moder-
ately important transmission belts of orders and policies from top
down. There is no threat here, even under extreme circumstances.
17. Nevertheless, as Marx correctly noted and Jiu Valley miners
have demonstrated, industrial workers have potential for militancy.
GOR’s industrialization program is now two decades old, and first
influx of workers in new industries who were fresh-from-the-farm
peasants dazzled by bright city lights are beginning to be replaced by
their less rustic children who could form a classic industrial proletariat.
GOR officials are increasingly aware of this situation, but regime has
yet to develop effective policies to deal with it although year-old “new
economic mechanism,” still only partially implemented, is designed in
part to meet some worker concerns. Grievances of kind familiar to
Western trade union leaders do already exist, and ad hoc organizations
could spring up to seek their redress, as in Jiu Valley affair and
more recent “free trade union” (SLOMR) incident. As shown by
both examples, however, GOR would have quickly and efficiently
to defuse situation and destroy any incipient organization capable
of serving as vehicle for expression of complaints of workers and
others. While we therefore believe that in immediate future GOR

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
will face from labor sector no challenge that it cannot control, regime
may be in race with time to complete industrialization/development
program and begin disbursement of substantial material rewards
before embryonic worker militancy flowers and spreads as it has,
for example, in Poland.
18. Scientists, academicians, technicians, sub-managers, career
bureaucrats, and other professionals are crucial to success of Romania’s
modernization effort. Aware of this, regime has been generally success-
ful in providing them with status, facilities, promotion opportunities,
and material rewards. Nevertheless, there are indications that at least
some of these persons feel their talents are underutilized and insuffi-
ciently recognized, especially in a situation in which political reliability
is still a more important criterion for advancement than individual
competence in situations where one of these two elements is missing.
Consequently, while Romania’s late start at intensive modernization-
cum-industrialization has probably postponed the conflict between
technocrats and apparatchiks generally predicted for this type of soci-
ety, as emphasis switches more and more to quality rather than quantity
this problem could become more acute. June 7 appointment of Elena
Ceausescu as President of National Council of Science and Technology
will not help.
19. Peasants traditionally have constituted most exploited and most
explosive element in Romania (e.g. 1907 Peasant Revolt), but postwar
industrialization program has changed situation radically and sapped
countryside of its destabilizing potential. Agricultural labor force now
consists preponderantly of women and old men, as young male (and
many female) workers have been absorbed by industry. Further, condi-
tions in the countryside today are light years better than they have
ever been, with schools, health care, decent housing, roads, electricity,
and potable water systems extended into all areas of the country.
Youth and Students
20. Communist Youth Organization (UTC) and Communist Stu-
dents Association (UASCR) are all-encompassing organizations con-
trolled by the adult party for which they serve as a principal training
and recruitment ground. In spite of some differences in style and out-
look, they have shown little tendency to strike out on their own as
party youth movements have in other countries; they probably could
not do so here even if they wanted to. Nor have we detected any
inclination to form ad hoc groups outside UTC/UASCR framework
around specific issues or personalities. As a rule, Romanian youth/
students are not a volatile element as compared to similar groups
elsewhere. Concerned about career opportunities and a job assignment
system rigorously based on academic achievement, most Romanian
students have neither time nor energy to become involved in non-

Romania
conformist activities which could jeopardize their entire future. Further,
Romanian system can generally absorb and reward its high school and
university graduates—especially those trained in technical/scientific
skills, as most are—so that there are no more than isolated problems
of the unemployed, and therefore restless, intellectual.
Religious Groups
21. Leadership of all fourteen recognized denominations follow
rule of “rendering unto Caesar”, except that in Romania Caesar’s
share is significantly larger than elsewhere. In return, religious leaders
become, de facto, coopted into the ruling establishment and are
therefore unlikely to challenge it seriously. Moreover, Romanian
Orthodox Church, which is the overwhelmingly dominant denomina-
tion, has no tradition of militancy on temporal issues and an unbroken
record of accommodating itself to whatever government is in power.
Dissidents within established denominations, particularly Baptists
and other proselytizing neo-Protestants, do have some potential for
causing disruption and are more difficult to coerce or buy off, but
GOR, often acting through official denomination leaders, has been
successful so far in confining religious dissidence to limited and
generally harmless manifestations. While there are a few unrecognized
and therefore technically illegal denominations, they exert little influ-
ence and have not been so grossly persecuted as to engender a
revenge mentality. Largest group in this category is Greek Catholic
(Uniate) Church, which was officially abolished by GOR in 1948
and forceably merged into Orthodox Church; although scattered
pockets of sub rosa Uniates still exist, they are quiescent and show
no tendency to attempt to reclaim by force what was taken from
them. Finally, in spite of fact that legion of Archangel Michael/Iron
Guard, the principal grass roots organization Romania has produced
this century, combined religious mysticism with jingoistic nationalism
and fascist ideology, we view this organization as a product of
1930’s whose conditions are unlikely to be duplicated again; attempts
by “court poet” Adrian Paunescu to parlay similar elements into a
political mass movement nominally loyal to Ceausescu have met
Ethnic Minorities
22. Hungarians. Major unrest and insurrection among Romania’s
two million ethnic Hungarians is the single most important possible
source of domestic strife, as ethnic conflict between Serbs and Croats
could tear Yugoslavia apart. History of Romanian-Hungarian conflict,
Foreign Policy File, P770121–0954)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
size of Hungarian minority, its concentration in geographical center of
country, its distinct language and culture, its ties to separate religious
denominations, and its psychological perception of being discriminated
against by Romanian majority provide potentially combustible ingredi-
ents of which GOR is keenly aware. We detect no serious effervescence
in Hungarian areas at present, no embryonic “liberation” or other
organized movement, and no charismatic leaders capable of fanning
grievances into political flames. We further doubt that spontaneous
combustion would take place, barring a major and unlikely change in
present circumstances such as a gross reversal of GOR’s minority pol-
icy. Nevertheless, a relatively rapid deterioration could occur, espe-
cially if such outside actors as the Governments of Hungary and Soviet
Union were actively involved.
23. Germans. Ethnic German community, while numerically signi-
ficant (circa 350,000), is not now a factor for instability. Once a source
of Hitler’s SS divisions as well as an effective and active FLT column
for Nazi Germany, German community was shattered by wartime
losses and immediate postwar repression including deportations, and
today is dispirited, demoralized, and interested primarily in emigration
to West Germany. As long as issuance of emigration passports contin-
ues at a substantial rate, as it has for last two and a half years, there
should be no problem.
24. Gypsies. As elsewhere, Gypsies in Romania constitute a true
underclass—loathed by all other elements in society, ignored by outside
world, relegated to most menial tasks, and butt of real and serious
discrimination. None of this is qualitatively new in centuries-old saga
of Gypsies and their wandering, and record of Ceausescu regime
toward them is probably as good as any previous Romanian Govern-
ment. There is no overt sign of restiveness in Gypsy community or of
political mobilization to correct grievances, but it is doubtful if any
non-Gypsy, including GOR leaders, has any real idea of what Gypsies
are doing or thinking. There is not even any good estimate of their
actual numbers, although there is a universal belief that birthrate among
Gypsies is significantly higher than among any other ethnic group.
Consequently, while we see little present danger to regime from Gyp-
sies, we do see an increasing social problem which will probably get
worse before it gets better (if it does).
Interactions
25. While interrelationships of policies and groups is a complex
social and political phenomenon, we wish to note three points which
strike us as especially significant: (a) there is a close tie between reli-
gious affiliation and ethnic membership; (b) unlike such Communist
countries as Poland, there is no discernible worker-intellectual linkage
here; and (c) GOR will not tolerate existence of any organization, irre-

Romania
spective of origin, not totally under party/state control, especially if it
could serve as vehicle for expression of accumulated grievances of
diverse groups (e.g. “free trade union” group), and on past record it
will move quickly, efficiently, and ruthlessly if necessary to destroy it
before it can take root and spread.
External Influences
26. There are many external influences on formulation and execu-
tion of Romania’s “independent” foreign policy, but very few lap over
into internal policy or affect domestic stability. Internally, only Hun-
gary and Soviet Union could play important roles, but there is no
compelling evidence that they are doing so.
27. Hungary and Transylvania are linked together by history,
race, and culture (as Transylvania is also similarly linked to classic
Romania), and interest of Hungarian Hungarians in situation of their
ethnic brethren is as natural as Romanian interest in Bessarabia, a
region heavily populated by ethnic Romanians which is now the
Moldavian SSR of Soviet Union. Given centuries of Romanian-
Hungarian conflict and repeated shifts in ownership of Transylvania,
however, Romanians interpret this Hungarian interest as a thinly
veiled lust for recovery of this “lost” territory, probably at Soviet
instigation. Realization that Hungary internally is now in many ways
a more attractive place to live than Romania adds to Romanian
concern about Hungary’s appeal to Transylvanian Magyars and the
“subversive influences” emanating from Budapest. While we agree
that GOH could exert a serious destabilizing force if it desired, we
see present Kadar regime as essentially cautious on this issue,
generally limiting official actions and keeping Hungarian nationalist
firebrands under control.
28. All Romanians claim to see Soviet hand behind any internal
disruption, but hard evidence is lacking. Still, as our study on Soviet
leverage in Romania (Bucharest 138)6 concluded, one goal of Soviet
activities within Romania must be identification and recruitment of
individuals who could if necessary form a puppet regime imposed
by the Red Army. Soviet Union has unquestioned military ability to
subjugate Romania and has demonstrated in Hungary and Czechoslo-
vakia, the political will to do so if it became convinced that vital security
interests were seriously threatened by events in Romania. A Soviet
invasion, unlikely as it seems now, would create so totally different a
situation here as to render this analysis of regime stability inoperative.
Aggrey
6 See Document 212.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
214.
Memorandum From Stephen Larrabee of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Assistant
for National Security Affairs (Aaron)1
Washington, undated
SUBJECT
Request by Romanian Ambassador for Meeting
Ion Besteliu, DCM at the Romanian Embassy, called me today to
ask for an urgent appointment with you on either Thursday or Friday. He
wishes to discuss with you the problems Romania is currently facing
on the Hill regarding an extension of the MFN Waiver.2
Nimetz testified before the Vanik trade subcommittee on Friday
on behalf of an extension of MFN for Romania and Hungary. The
Hungarian portion went O.K. but there was considerable opposition
to an extension of MFN for Romania, particularly from Congressman
Schulze who introduced a disapproval resolution which was referred
to Vanik’s sub-committee. The main problem is that the B’nai B’rith
and several other Jewish groups who originally supported an extension,
have received some information about current emigration to Israel
which has caused them to withdraw their support. While this informa-
tion appears to be wrong, this support is crucial for obtaining MFN
for Romania.
Vanik is very concerned about the mood on the Hill and is
prepared to do battle on behalf of an extension as are influential
members of the House Foreign Affairs Committee such as Derwinski,
Findley, and Hamilton. Vanik is working with the Romanians and
Jewish groups in an effort to work out a solution. However, if we
2 On June 22, hearings took place in the Trade Subcommittee of the House Ways
and Means Committee on Carter’s recommendation to extend MFN to Hungary and
Romania. While MFN for Hungary was not met with any opposition, extension for
Romania faced opposition from several subcommittee members as well as Jewish groups
convinced that Romanian Jews were not given fair opportunity to emigrate. In telegram
161636 to Bucharest and Budapest, June 23, the Department warned: “It appears that
MFN for Romania faces serious challenge.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
informed the Embassy that, as a result of the events June 22 hearing, Vanik had requested
that Romanian Ambassador Ionescu meet with him and leaders of the B’nai B’rith
organization to discuss the matter of Jewish emigration from Romania. The Department
also reported that Vanik had suspended the hearing before B’nai B’rith testified in
opposition of the waiver. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,

Romania
cannot get the Jewish groups on board, he feels MFN for Romania
may be doomed.
There is a time constraint, however. A resolution of disapproval
can be held within a committee no longer than 30 days after it has
been introduced. Vanik intends to hold hearings on July 9, after talking
to the Jewish groups, and then report to the Full Committee on July
11. He hopes to get a favorable report out of the Full Ways and Means
Committee, and call for a debate on the House Floor about July 17.
The main thrust of the strategy is for Vanik to take the initiative rather
than Schultze. At the same time we are pressing the Romanians to
allow more Jews to emigrate to Israel and to simplify emigration proce-
dures generally.
RECOMMENDATION
That you authorize me to set up a meeting between you and the
Romanian Ambassador tomorrow or Friday.3
3 “Tomorrow or Friday” is crossed out and replaced in handwriting with “Tuesday,
July 3.”Aaron approved the recommendation. A note below reads: “DA appointment
set for Tuesday, 3:30 pm.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
215.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
Romania1
171577. Moscow for DAS Robert Barry. Subject: MFN for Romania:
Nimetz’ Meeting With Bogdan; Bogdan’s Meeting With Jewish Repre-
1. (C-entire text)
2. Counselor Nimetz met July 2 with visiting MFA Counselor for
North America Bogdan and Romanian Ambassador Ionescu (who can-
celled planned return to Bucharest). Nimetz described the concerns of
American Jewish organizations over declining emigration and urged
the Romanian Government to face this as a practical problem. Nimetz
said that Jewish organizations are concerned that Jackson-Vanik is
not working.3 Trade has increased but the kind of emigration which
interests them is not going up. Jewish groups believe that the problem
is intimidation in the application procedures. Having raised these con-
cerns, they are in a position where they cannot easily back off without
some tangible results. Nimetz noted that he had told representatives
of the Jewish groups that distribution of applications by the Joint Distri-
bution Committee would prove very difficult for the Romanian Gov-
ernment. He asked Bogdan whether a Romanian could be at the JDC
Analysis for the Commonwealth and Eastern Europe, Office Subject Files, 1965–1980,
Sent for information Priority to Budapest and Moscow. Drafted by Bradtke; cleared by
Schmidt, Vest, and Larrabee, and in S/S; approved by Nimetz.
conversation with representatives from several Jewish organizations. Nimetz emphasized
that the “administration views possible failure to renew MFN as very serious matter
which would undermine a decade of effort to build up U.S.-Romanian relations.” He
also stressed that failure would “mean that no other country would be willing to submit
itself to uncertainties of waiver process.” Noting that “continued MFN for Romania is
in grave danger unless the GOR is prepared to be cooperative,” the Department instructed
Aggrey to seek an appointment at the earliest opportunity with Romanian officials, and
“make clear that loss of MFN is now real possibility. Romanians should harbor no doubts
that if Jewish organizations in the U.S. oppose MFN for Romania, there will be insufficient
support left in Congress to prevent passage of Schulze’s disapproval recommenda-
tion.” (Ibid.)
3 Nimetz was informed of Jewish-American concerns with the extension of MFN
to Romania as early as June 7. Representatives of the American-Jewish Committee, the
Anti-Defamation League, the B’nai B’rith and the National Jewish Community Relations
Advisory Council, were particularly alarmed by what they saw as a cumbersome pre-
screening process that led to intimidation of applicants. In telegram 147765 to Bucharest,
June 9, the Department instructed Aggrey to meet with Pacoste and stress U.S. concerns
regarding Jewish emigration. (Ibid.)

Romania
office to expedite applications. Nimetz urged Bogdan to be prepared
to negotiate with the Jewish groups.
3. Bogdan said that he had come to the U.S. on a fact-finding
mission and did not have instructions on how to resolve the problem
which had arisen. He expressed puzzlement with motivation of Ameri-
can Jewish groups and their timing in raising emigration issue. Noting
that he had spoken with Rabbi Rosen and with Romanian emigration
authorities, Bogdan said he could see no Jewish emigration problem.
He had been assured by Romanian officials that only in the case of
German emigration are there any problems or attempts to spread out
applications. Bogdan said that he had also spoken with the Israeli
Ambassador and did not believe that the Government of Israel was
prompting Jewish organizations to raise the emigration issue. As for
using the JDC to distribute applications, Bogdan said personally he
believes such an idea is unacceptable. No foreign or international orga-
nization could play such a role in Romania.
4. Nimetz offered two explanations for actions of Jewish groups:
First, a heightened concern with general question of Jackson-Vanik in
view of possibility of MFN for the Soviet Union; and second, the reports
from Jews who have left Romania of intimidation at pre-screening
process. He again urged Bogdan not to be overly concerned with the
motivation of the Jewish groups and instead to focus on practical
aspects of solving the problem.
5. Bogdan said he would try to find “a reasonable solution” but
that he is troubled by the escalation of demands and what might be
next. He mentioned possibilities of fact-finding trip by U.S. Jewish
groups or presentation of lists through JDC or other bodies. Bogdan
commented that, whatever happens to MFN, it will not have negative
effect on the Jews in Romania.
6. In closing, Nimetz stressed the urgency of the situation and
asked Bogdan to be in touch after Bogdan’s meetings later in the day
with representatives of American Jewish organizations.
7. House Trade Subcommittee staff member David Rohr, who par-
ticipated as “observer” in subsequent meeting at Romanian Embassy
on July 2 between Romanians and representatives of American Jewish
organizations, gave Department the following account of the meeting.
(The Jewish organizations were represented by Al Moses of American
Jewish Committee, Mark Talisman of Council of Jewish Federations
and Welfare Fund, and George Specter of B’nai B’rith International.
Moses acted as spokesman in place of B’nai B’rith International Presi-
dent Jack Spitzer, who is now in Geneva.)
8. Rohr said Moses made following three-part proposal to the GOR
to remedy their concerns re Jewish emigration:

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
9. (A) Rabbi Rosen would make a public statement in Romania
similar to that which he made in synagogues in 1975 to the effect that
those persons who wish to apply for permission to emigrate from
Romania may do so. Statement would indicate where persons should
go to initiate the process, how it works, etc. (Rohr said implicit in this
was that application forms would have to be available to those desiring
to fill them out.)
10. (B) GOR would agree that while applicants’ requests for permis-
sion to emigrate were being processed by GOR authorities, applicants
were free to contact Israeli Embassy to begin visa application procedure.
(Moses told Nimetz following meeting with Romanians today that this
step was designed to provide permanent monitoring mechanism of
number of pending cases. The GOI would maintain a list, which it
would share with either the USG or directly with American Jewish
groups. Moses said he already had discussed this aspect of the proposal
with GOI Embassy in Washington.)
11. (C) Concurrent with its acceptance of steps (A) and (B), GOR
would provide American Jewish organizations with numerical account-
ing of how many Jews it expected would be departing for Israel in the
next few weeks and months.
12. Bogdan, who Rohr said did all the talking for GOR side,
responded by saying he would have to transmit the Jewish organiza-
tions’ proposal directly to President Ceausescu. Bogdan said he was
all too aware of the time pressures, and hoped to have a response for
Moses in the nearest future. At one point in the discussion, Rohr said,
Bogdan indicated it might be possible for the GOR to revert back to
the procedures in effect in 1975 with regard to application for emigra-
tion (which presumably would mean dropping pre-screening).
13. Rohr said that Moses and Talisman were pleased by Bogdan’s
reaction to their concerns and their proposal. They had indicated to
Rohr after the meeting that they had dropped the notion of having the
Joint Distribution Committee serve as a “good offices” intermediary
because of the negative signals they had received in the past few
days. He also said that Moses had promised the Romanians that if an
understanding were reached as they had proposed, the Jewish groups
would not publicize it here, which they recognized might embarrass
the GOR in some fashion. Rohr said that at no time during the meeting
did the subject arise of Jewish emigration to the United States per se.
14. At end of day Bogdan came by alone to brief Nimetz on develop-
ments. He confirmed essence of proposal reported by Rohr in paras.
8–11 above. While cautious, he said he would be reporting them favora-
bly to Bucharest.
Christopher

Romania
216.
Memorandum of Conversation1
SUBJECT
Summary of David Aaron’s Meeting with Ambassador Corneliu Bogdan,
Director of the North American Division in the Romanian Foreign Ministry (U)
PARTICIPANTS
Mr. David Aaron, Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security
Affairs
Stephen Larrabee, NSC Staff (Notetaker)
Ambassador Corneliu Bogdan
Ion Besteliu, Political Counselor, Romanian Embassy
Mr. Aaron opened the meeting by welcoming Amb. Bogdan2 and
saying it was nice to see him again. (U)
Amb. Bogdan stated that Mr. Aaron presumably knew why he was
here. He did not want to unduly bother Mr. Aaron, but hoped that he
could receive the Administration’s support regarding MFN. (C)
Mr. Aaron underscored that the Administration supported MFN
for Romania and had worked hard to obtain it. He emphasized, how-
ever, that there was a concrete problem which had to be resolved. He
pointed out that to be successful with the Congress the Administration
needed the support of the interested American groups. (C)
Amb. Bogdan stated he did not want to cover the same old ground.
He was not certain why the groups had raised the issue. The fate of
the Jews in Romania would not be affected by MFN one way or the
Aaron’s office at the White House. Earlier that day, Larrabee sent a briefing paper
outlining Romanian concerns and providing Aaron with talking points for his meeting
with Bogdan. Larrabee recommended that Aaron stress the administration’s strong com-
mitment to MFN for Romania, and that, irrespective of right or wrong, support of Jewish-
American groups was vital for congressional approval. Aaron initialed the memorandum
indicating he had seen it. (Ibid.) The memorandum of conversation was approved by
Aaron on July 7. He instructed his staff to “Keep it here. Don’t send it out.” (Ibid.)
2 The meeting with Bogdan took the place of the previously scheduled meeting
between Aaron and Ionescu. Bogdan, who had been Ambassador to Washington from
Larrabee informed Aaron’s office that Bogdan was coming and was seeking an appoint-
ment with Aaron to discuss the situation. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
Mr. Aaron stated that it was his impression that the groups were
concerned that the numbers were dropping. Basically, he thought they
wanted to support MFN but they were continually receiving reports
about procedural problems, etc. (C)
Amb. Bogdan replied that the Romanians were going to propose a
formula which they hoped would help. He insisted, however, that they
could not accept any third party intermediary. Rabbi Rosen (leader of
the Jews in Romania) would make a statement saying that the Jews
who wanted to leave are not intimidated, etc. This statement would
be publicized. Some sort of monitoring system, perhaps similar to that
of SALT (i.e., national means), could be established. He pointed out
that Senator Jackson had an entire office doing this type of work and
that the Romanians were ready to do it as well. (C)
Mr. Aaron suggested that the best way to prove the present proce-
dures were no bar to emigration was to reform them. He asked why
Jews making an application could not notify the Israeli Embassy at the
same time. (U)
Amb. Bogdan replied that it did not look feasible, but he did not
elaborate why. He insisted, however, that there was no intention on the
part of the Romanian Government to keep the Jews from emigrating. (C)
Mr. Aaron stressed in response that the Romanian Government
would have to do something about the procedures. The Administration
would work hard, but he pointed out it could lose if the groups inter-
ested in Jewish emigration failed to support MFN. (C)
Amb. Bogdan suggested that the concerns of the Jewish groups
could be allayed by the formula he had outlined. (U)
Mr. Aaron returned to the question of procedures, insisting that
some change had to be undertaken and that there was a need for some
sort of real action. The groups interested in Jewish emigration had
backed off from some of their original ideas, but there was a need to
respond to their concerns. He felt that Rabbi Rosen’s statement might
not be enough; something more would have to be done. (C)
Amb. Bogdan replied that he did not know what more the Romanian
Government could do. He stressed, however, that the Romanian side
was ready to try to meet the concerns of the Jewish groups. (U)
Mr. Aaron stated that he would not argue the case for others. This
was not his role. He reiterated the seriousness of the situation and the
need to find a way to resolve it. (C)
Amb. Bogdan said that he intended to stay in the States for the
duration of the struggle rather than returning to Romania as he had
originally intended. (C)

Romania
Turning to another subject, he noted that the Romanian Govern-
ment was grateful for the briefing by Mr. Barry on the Summit.3 This
had been highly appreciated. One point needed clarification, however.
This concerned MFN for the Soviet Union. It looked like it would not
be possible to give MFN to the USSR this year. At the same time the
US might feel that it could not delay MFN for China. Bogdan felt that
part of the Jewish preoccupation with MFN for Romania was related
Mr. Aaron replied that the President was still considering the ques-
tion of MFN for the Soviet Union and had not made up his mind. At
this point it was simply too early to tell what the President would do.
The Administration had not linked the two (MFN for China and the
Soviet Union). It wanted to proceed forward with both. However, the
point of decision had not been reached. (C)
Amb. Bogdan stated that he believed some of the Jewish concern
was related not just to Romania, but to the Soviet Union. He then
turned to the question of MBFR, noting that it was his understanding
that there had been no real progress in Vienna. He did not understand
why the starting level of troops was such a problem. (C)
In reply, Mr. Aaron noted that at Vienna Gromyko had noted that
the differences between the troop levels of both sides was 150,000.
Defense Minister Ustinov had corrected him, saying that the difference
Mr. Aaron noted that this was a large discrepancy. The problem
was that we couldn’t agree on the starting point. If we couldn’t agree
on the starting point, it would be hard to know how many troops had
been withdrawn. In short, if we couldn’t agree on where we were, how
could we agree on where we were going? He noted that SALT was
easy to verify in comparison to MBFR. (C)
22 meeting with Andrei to brief the Romanian Foreign Minister on SALT II and the Carter-
Brezhnev Summit in Vienna. The Embassy reported that, following the presentation of
the U.S. position, Andrei told Barry that he wondered “if briefing which Soviets might
provide would be as helpful.” The Romanians also raised GOR concerns regarding Soviet
views of Chinese participation in SALT III, effects of SALT II on Western European
disarmament thinking, and possibility of movement on other disarmament issues. Barry
also met with Andrei on June 23, prior to his departure from Bucharest. At that meeting,
the Embassy reported, “Andrei reiterated GOR support for SALT II Treaty as a good
step toward other disarmament measures, goal of which is to stop arms race, cut military
budgets, and effect troop reductions.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
File, D790288–0202)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
Amb. Bogdan stated that he had attended a 10-member conference
in Geneva at which Jules Moch5 had said that the question of troops
was not difficult to verify. (C)
Mr. Aaron replied that we might have agreed until we had run
into this discrepancy. The Soviets hoped that we would set aside
the question of data; however, this was an extremely important issue
politically. (C)
Amb. Bogdan reaffirmed his intention to stay in the States until the
question of MFN had been resolved. (C)
In closing, Mr. Aaron said that he hoped he would be able to see
Amb. Bogdan again before he left. (U)
5 Former French politician, and member of the French Government in the Fourth
Republic, as well as former French Representative to the UN Commission on Disarma-
ment from 1951 until 1960.
217.
Editorial Note
On July 6, 1979, Matthew Nimetz, Counselor of the Department
of State, met with Romanian Ministry of Foreign Affairs Director for
North American Affairs Corneliu Bogdan and Romanian Ambassador
to the United States Nicolae Ionescu as well as with representatives
of Jewish-American organizations. The Romanian officials informed
Nimetz that they had reached an understanding with the Jewish-Ameri-
can organizations on Jewish emigration. The agreement, reported to
Bucharest in telegram 177424, July 9, provided that the Chief Rabbi of
Romanian Jewry would issue a statement to the community noting
that it was “the policy of the Romanian Government to act expeditiously
on applications of Jews who seek to be reunited with family members
outside of Romania,” that Bucharest would “supply a list of Romanian
Jews who make application and the date the applications are filed,”
and that Romanian Jews who wished to emigrate could also write
Israel to seek letters of support for their case which Jewish groups
would use to make a list of people wishing to emigrate. Based on the
understanding, Alfred Moses of the American Jewish Committee told
Nimetz that the Jewish organization would now support extension
of most-favored-nation status to Romania. While cautioning that the
understanding was not an agreement with the United States Govern-
ment, Nimetz noted that the administration was “pleased with and

Romania
actively supports the steps taken by the Romanian Government to
clarify its policy on emigration.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central
Foreign Policy File, D790311–0328)
On July 10, the Trade Subcommittee of the House Ways and Means
Committee met to discuss Representative Richard Schulze’s resolution
of disapproval of President Jimmy Carter’s recommendation to extend
most favored nation status to Romania (H. Res. 317). Schulze “argued
that Romanian foreign policy independence was not relevant to the
MFN waiver and that terminating waiver would be signal to Romani-
ans and to any other Communist countries that violations of human
rights will not be tolerated.” By a vote of 13–7, the subcommittee
agreed to report the resolution unfavorably for discussion in the full
committee. (Telegram 178408 to Bucharest, July 11; National Archives,
On July 19, the Senate International Trade Subcommittee held its
own hearings on MFN renewal. Reporting on the hearings in telegram
187329 to Bucharest, July 19, the Department noted that the subcommit-
tee staff “expects that Senate Finance Committee will issue ‘nasty state-
ment’ but that there will be no rpt no resolution of disapproval.”
Bogdan and Ionescu met with Deputy Secretary of State Warren
Christopher on July 20 to discuss MFN and other bilateral questions.
Noting that the MFN problem seemed to be on its way to a positive
outcome, Christopher told the Romanian officials that “it had been a
difficult exercise” and cautioned them that “next year is an election year
and Congress can be expected to scrutinize MFN renewal carefully.”
He also informed the Romanian Government that the Secretary was
considering a trip to Romania in early fall. (Telegram 189034 to Bucha-
rest, July 21; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
Schulze’s resolution of disapproval paving the way for MFN for
Romania.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
218.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
Romania1
259744. Subject: Vance-Andrei Bilateral at the UNGA: Bilateral
Issues.
1. (C-entire text)
2. Summary. Secretary Vance met with Romanian Foreign Minister
Andrei in New York on October 2 for approximately 50 minutes. Andrei
was accompanied by UN Ambassador Teodor Marinescu, Special
Assistant Marcel Ghibernea, and First Secretary Ion Goritza (inter-
preter). US participants were Counselor Nimetz, Senior Advisor to
the Secretary Philip Habib, Assistant Secretary Maynes, EUR Deputy
Assistant Secretary Barry, and EUR/EE Director Schmidt (notetaker).
On bilateral matters, Andrei said Ceausescu was satisfied with the
continued development of our relations. He raised only two bilateral
issues—further expedited issuance of US export licenses and access to
Norfolk for Romanian ships loading Virginia coal—and requested the
Secretary’s personal support on both. The Secretary’s planned visit to
Bucharest was discussed briefly and the Secretary said he wished to
propose firm dates in December within the coming week. Multilateral
issues discussed (see septels)2 included CSCE, the Middle East, South-
east Asia, and the Romanian UNGA initiative on peaceful settlement
of disputes. End summary.
3. Andrei said he had been requested by President Ceausescu to
extend his greetings to President Carter and express his satisfaction
with the continued development of US-Romanian relations both in the
bilateral
and
international
spheres.
The
positive
developments
Confidential; Immediate; Exdis. Drafted by Schmidt; cleared by Barry; approved by L.
Paul Bremer. Sent for information to USUN.
2 International issues discussed were reported in telegram 260883 to Bucharest,
telegram 262360 to Bucharest and Seoul, October 6, the Department reported that in the
course of their bilateral meeting, Andrei informed Vance that, while in Bucharest, the
North Korean Prime Minister asked the Romanian Government to inform Washington
that Pyongyang’s “public position on the trilateral proposal [a meeting among USG–
ROK–DPRK representatives] was not their last word and that they were ready to explore
the question further should the USG wish to do so.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central
Foreign Policy File, D790458–0444)
3 The 1978 Joint Declaration agreed on during Ceausescu’s trip to Washington. See
footnote 3, Document 204.

Romania
the interest of both countries and of worldwide peace. The Secretary
noted that the President wished to extend his greetings to Andrei
and to President Ceausescu and to stress our desire to work with
Romania on bilateral matters and on solving pressing international
problems.
4. Secretary’s visit. Secretary Vance said he looked forward to
visiting Bucharest and would ask his staff to work out proposed dates
within the coming week for a visit either at the beginning of December
or immediately after a meeting he would attend in Brussels later that
month. Andrei said he was authorized by Ceausescu to fix the visit at
any time except during the November 10–25 period. He explained that
Ceausescu wished to meet with the Secretary during his visit but would
be busy with the Romanian Party Congress during the period he had
specified in November. Andrei said he was certain the Secretary’s
visit would contribute significantly to US-Romanian relations and to
bilateral cooperation on international issues. He proposed, and the
Secretary agreed, that an important area for an extensive exchange of
views during the visit would be the “new economic order” and other
North-South issues.
5. Trade and export licenses. Andrei said he had only two
bilateral matters to raise with the Secretary. Both were economic
and on each he wished to request the Secretary’s personal support.
The first was the matter of US export licenses. For the first months
of 1979, the US had enjoyed an active balance of trade with Romania,
and his government did not see this as a problem. (Nimetz noted
that in 1978, Romania had enjoyed a trade surplus with the US,
which had aroused some questions during the congressional review
of MFN.) On the other hand, Andrei said, he requested the Secretary’s
continued support in efforts to expedite the issuance of US export
licenses. Romania was grateful for what had been done already in
this regard, in the spirit of President Carter’s letter to President
Ceausescu, and would like to see these efforts continue. Andrei
indicated that a list of pending license requests would soon be
transmitted to Counselor Nimetz via the Romanian Embassy. In
response to the Secretary’s query concerning the status of this question
Nimetz said the problem had been more in the length of time
required to process license applications rather than in large-scale
denials of licenses. The executive branch had made serious efforts
to expedite processing of applications, and good results had been
achieved. He indicated that we were well disposed to continue these
efforts. He said there had been no recent requests from Romanian
Embassy here to expedite specific applications, but we would be
glad to act on such a list when it was received.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
6. Access to Port of Norfolk. Noting that he had already discussed
the question with Nimetz and Assistant Secretary Vest,4 Andrei ex-
plained his interest in an arrangement which would permit Romanian
ships to load coal at the Port of Norfolk. He said that the Romanian
contract for purchases of coal from Island Creek, Virginia, called for
long-term deliveries, perhaps extending as much as 50 years. The inabil-
ity of Romanian ships to load the coal at Norfolk already added some
$2 million per year to their costs. Andrei stressed that Romania was
ready to accept whatever conditions or controls the US might want to
place on its ships in order to gain access to Norfolk.5
7. Nimetz noted that we already had carefully examined this prob-
lem in response to earlier Romanian requests. As a result, he was more
pessimistic about this problem than about US export licenses. The port
security regulations extended to all Warsaw Pact countries and had
been in effect for some twenty years. Secretary Vance said he could
readily see how it would be more costly to ship the coal by rail from
the mine to Baltimore rather than directly to Hampton Roads. He said
that while he could make no promises that a way could be found, he
would discuss the Romanian request with Defense Secretary Brown.
Andrei expressed appreciation and added that it would be very difficult
for Romania to have the coal shipped from Norfolk on non-Warsaw
Pact ships, especially since Romania only recently had constructed
special cargo ships for this and similar purposes.
Christopher
4 The conversation among Assistant Secretary Vest, Counselor Nimetz, and Roman-
ian Foreign Minister Andrei, which took place October 1 in Washington was reported
on October 4 in telegram 260381 to Bucharest. Andrei stressed the Romanian desire to
receive deliveries of the coal purchased in the United States at Hampton Roads (or the
Norfolk Harbor) rather than Baltimore. They also discussed the CSCE process and
developments in the Middle East. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
File, [no film number])
Occidental Petroleum for coal from the Island Creek mine in Virginia. (Telegram 4383
D770212–0906) Bucharest sought access to the Hampton Roads port in order to reduce
the transportation costs associated with the delivery of coal to Romanian ships. In a
conversation with Nimetz on May 7, 1979, Pacoste expressed the hope that the United
States would reconsider its access ban of Warsaw Pact vessels to Hampton Roads for
Romanian vessels, and that the Romanian Government “would be willing to comply
with any restrictions if access can be granted.” (Telegram 2844 from Bucharest, May 10,

Romania
219.
Editorial Note
On October 12, 1979, the Department of State informed the Embas-
sies in Romania and Yugoslavia that Secretary of State Cyrus Vance
was happy to accept the standing invitation to visit the two countries
and planned to do so in December. (Telegram 267704 to Bucharest and
Belgrade, October 12; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
File, D790469–0222) Romanian Foreign Minister Stefan Andrei had
transmitted the invitation through Counselor of the Department of
State Matthew Nimetz during their May meeting in Bucharest. In a June
5 memorandum to Vance, Nimetz recommended a visit, suggesting it
“could be very useful in coaxing the Romanians to reform some of the
bureaucratic practices that lead to continuing human rights difficul-
ties.” Vance approved the recommendation on June 7 and wrote “OK.
In the fall” in the margin. (National Archives, RG 59, Office of the
Memo File, Apr–May–Jun)
In the early morning of November 4, Iranian supporters of Ayatol-
lah Khomeini occupied the grounds of the U.S. Embassy in Tehran
and took U.S. citizens there hostage. Initially organized as a protest
against the Carter administration’s decision to allow the Shah of Iran
to enter the United States for cancer treatment, the protest quickly
evolved into a political tool used by Khomeini to secure and expand
his control over the revolution. Vance, convinced that the release could
be secured via diplomacy, focused on coordinating the diplomatic
efforts to secure the release of the hostages.
Official reaction in Romania to the taking of the hostages was
initially muted. According to Embassy reports, the government-con-
trolled press ran only two stories in November on the hostage situation.
The low-key statements, the Embassy suggested, were typical of Roma-
nia’s way of dealing with difficult issues in the press. (Telegram 7719
from Bucharest, November 19; National Archives, RG 59, Central
November 22, the Department reported on the November 20 meeting
between Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs Rob-
ert Barry and Romanian Deputy Chief of Mission Boris Ranghet. Barry
told Ranghet that given Romania’s desire to continue to improve
relations with the United States, “it was difficult to understand why
Romania had not taken any steps to express publicly its condemnation
of the events in Iran.” Barry also stressed that “this was a case in which
Romania would be expected by the US public and US Government to
take a stand.” Failure to do so, Barry told Ranghet, “would be inter-
preted by the United States as inconsistent with the GOR’s oft-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
expressed desire to improve bilateral relations.” (National Archives,
On December 1, U.S. Ambassador to Romania Rudolf Aggrey met
with Andrei at his request to deliver two démarches on the Iranian
situation and repeat Washington’s request for immediate, public action.
In telegram 8080 from Bucharest, December 1, Aggrey reported his
meeting with the Romanian Foreign Minister. Andrei, Aggrey wrote,
answered that “it was not true that Romania had not been ‘vigorous’
in this instance.” Although he had no authorization to provide details,
Andrei noted, “President Ceausescu was proceeding not just in the
sense of Romania’s respect for international law and the Vienna Con-
vention, but in the spirit of the Joint Statement he and President Carter
had signed.” The Foreign Minister assured the U.S. Ambassador that
he would seek authorization from Romanian President Nicolae Ceau-
sescu to brief Aggrey on Romanian activities. (National Archives, RG
described for Aggrey “in the strictest confidence” the Romanian efforts
in Tehran on behalf of the hostages. On Ceausescu’s initiative, Andrei
had passed to Ayatollah Khomeini, through Romanian contacts with
Arab States and organizations, the Romanian Government’s appeal to
release the hostages without any delay. Asked if the Iranians had
listened to the Romanian message, Andrei told Aggrey that “it is our
understanding that things are moving toward a solution, but we do not
know what compromise might be the key and we have no assurances.”
(Telegram 8127 from Bucharest, December 3; National Archives, RG
The ongoing hostage crisis caused the postponement of Vance’s
trip to Bucharest and Belgrade, and Ambassador Aggrey informed
Romanian Deputy Foreign Minister Cornel Pacoste on December 4 of
the postponement. In telegram 312957 to Bucharest, December 5, Vance
instructed Aggrey to seek an appointment with Andrei and find out
more information as to the impact the secret Romanian message had
in Tehran. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
Andrei in telegram 8401 from Bucharest, December 11. After informing
Andrei of President Carter and the Secretary of State’s appreciation
for Romanian efforts on behalf of the hostages, Aggrey, “speaking
personally” added that “the fact of the confidential Romanian demarche
was not generally known within our government [meant that] Roma-
nia’s efforts could not be appreciated by all of the influential people
in Washington who were assessing what our friends were doing
to help.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
Almost two months into the crisis in Iran, the Soviet leadership
approved the introduction of Soviet combat troops in Afghanistan. The

Romania
Soviet Army and special KGB combat units were airlifted to Kabul on
December 25. Soviet ground troops crossed the Afghan border on
December 27. The invasion, ostensibly at the request of the Afghan
Government, resulted in the assassination of Afghan President Hafizul-
lah Amin, and the installation of a new regime led by Babrak Karmal.
Writing in his diary on December 28, Carter noted that he was “deter-
mined to make this action as politically costly [to the Soviets] as possi-
ble. I sent messages to our allies, key nonaligned leaders, plus all the
Muslim countries—urging them to speak out strongly against the Soviet
action.” Carter added: “I also sent on the Hot Line the sharpest message
I have ever sent to Brezhnev, telling him that the invasion of Afghani-
stan would seriously and adversely affect the relationship between our
two countries.” (Carter, White House Diary, December 28, 1979, page
382) Over the next few months the President recalled the U.S. Ambassa-
dor from Moscow, asked the Senate to suspend consideration of the
SALT II Treaty, imposed a embargo on new grain sales and transfers
of technology to the Soviet Union, announced the U.S. boycott of the
1980 Olympics in Moscow, and increased the Defense budget request
to Congress.
In telegram 333360 to multiple posts, December 28, the Department
requested that a Presidential message be delivered to each head of
state concerning the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. The Embassy in
Bucharest, the telegram instructed, was to stress that Soviet actions
were in direct “violation of the sovereignty of an independent country”
and that they were in “direct conflict with Romania’s strong commit-
ment to the right of all nations to full independence, sovereignty, and
non-intervention in internal affairs.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central
Year’s reception for the Diplomatic Corps, Ceausescu told U.S. Chargé
d’Affairs a.i. Herbert Kaiser that Romania would “do whatever it can
to help resolve peacefully the Afghan problem and to obtain the with-
drawal of Soviet troops.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
Ceausescu detailing the decision taken at the December 12–14 NATO
Ministerial meeting in Brussels, including the reasons behind the deci-
sion to modernize long-range theater nuclear forces. The letter also
thanked Ceausescu for his government’s involvement in attempts to
release the hostages in Iran. In a handwritten postscript, Carter added
“I am sure you share our deep concern about the Soviet invasion of
Afghanistan. Please keep me informed on your views regarding this
matter.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material,
President’s Correspondence with Foreign Leaders File, Box 16, Roma-
delivered by the Embassy on January 2 to the Ministry of Foreign

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
In telegram 75 from Bucharest, January 4, the Embassy reported the
public pronouncements of Ceausescu and the government-controlled
media in Romania. While seeking to avoid explicit condemnation of
one or more of the parties involved, the Embassy wrote, the reaction to
the Soviet invasion was “sharp and pronounced. President Ceausescu’s
initial public reaction on December 29 was unusually rapid and his
reference to Afghanistan unusually pointed.” The Embassy concluded:
“The continued priority given the same theme in his New Year’s mes-
sage and the lengthy, authoritative editorial underline the high degree
of Romanian concern.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
the Embassy offered an analysis of the pressure likely faced by Bucha-
rest. Noting that Romania was the only Warsaw Pact member not to
endorse the Soviet invasion or recognize the Karmal regime, the
Embassy wrote that “the pressure from the Soviet Union and the War-
saw Pact is likely to intensify as international tensions grow. And yet,
for Ceausescu and his colleagues, closer allegiance to the Soviet Union
conflicts directly with their objective to achieve and maintain Romania’s
relative independence and would undermine an important basis of
Ceausescu’s acceptance by the vast majority of Romanians.” The
Embassy concluded that although “Ceausescu has demonstrated an
almost surprising willingness to continue to nurture publicly relations
with the United States” he might be forced toward “more circumspect
behavior” or “some gestures towards the Soviet Union. But all may
not be what it seems.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
Policy File, D800015–0843)

Romania
220.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, January 22, 1980
SUBJECT
Designation of David Newsom as a Presidential Emissary to Romania (C)
State recommends that David Newsom be designated as Presiden-
tial Emissary to Romania2 and that he stop-off in Bucharest on his
return from London to deliver a Presidential Message to Ceausescu.
The message is at Tab A.3 It has been cleared with the speechwriters. (C)
I support this recommendation. Ceausescu has condemned the
invasion of Afghanistan in several recent speeches, and Romania was
the only Warsaw Pact country not to vote against the Resolution in
the General Assembly condemning the invasion. At the same time
Ceausescu is understandably nervous about the implications of Soviet
actions in Afghanistan, particularly in light of Tito’s deteriorat-
ing health, and he has requested a high-level U.S. visit as soon as
possible.4 (C)
A visit by Newsom as Presidential Emissary would quietly demon-
strate our support for Romania in a low-key, non-provocative manner
and would provide an opportunity for us to present our views on
Iran and Afghanistan directly to Ceausescu. It would also serve as an
indirect signal to Yugoslavia of our continued interest in stability and
security in the Balkans generally. (C)
RECOMMENDATION: That you sign the Presidential message at
Tab A.5
Correspondence with Foreign Leaders File, Box 16, Romania: President Nicolae Ceau-
2 The recommendation was made in a memorandum from Tarnoff to Brzezinski
dated January 19 and forwarded to Brzezinski by Larrabee on January 21. (Ibid.)
3 Attached but not printed.
ian Government hoped to welcome a visit by a high-level U.S. official to Bucharest in
light of the international situation. The Embassy reported: “President Ceausescu and
especially Andrei feel let down by the postponement of the Secretary’s visit in December
and the abortion of Counselor Nimetz’s visit last week. Although they appreciate the
sound reasons for these changes, these do not compensate for the psychological loss of
support a high-level US mission to Bucharest at a time of strained relations with the
USSR. They remember the success of former Treasury Secretary Blumenthal’s visit here
Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, President’s Correspondence with

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
221.
Telegram From the Embassy in Romania to the Department
of State1
680. Subject: Newsom Discussions With Romanian President
Ceausescu. Ref: State 24016.2
1. Secret-entire text.
2. Summary: Under Secretary Newsom January 28 presented letter
from President Carter to President Ceausescu3 and had lively two
hour session, during which President Ceausescu expressed continuing
criticism of Soviet invasion of Afghanistan while indicating personal
puzzlement over motives for their actions, other than presumed Soviet
reaction to foreign backing of Afghan rebels. In lively give and take
discussion Ceausescu: (1) was skeptical that U.S. counter actions to
Soviets or sanctions in Iran would have desired effect; (2) expressed
confidence in prospects for Yugoslav stability post-Tito: (3) felt U.S.
should “do a lot more” re Palestinian issue and, despite counter argu-
ments, promoted idea during current Camp David negotiations of
parallel initiative involving Soviets, and relating to Palestinian rights;
(4) emphasized Romanian hopes for continuation of CSCE, specifically
stressing military disengagement and nuclear missiles issue; (5) cau-
tioned U.S. about promoting relations with China at expense of Soviets
or other nations. Ceausescu was careful throughout to balance criticism
of Soviet invasion of Afghanistan with reiteration of his general princi-
ples of detente and caution to U.S. not to aggravate situation through
its reaction to Afghan and Iranian situation. End summary.
3. Under Secretary Newsom had two hour discussion with Presi-
dent Ceausescu on January 28, accompanied by Ambassador Aggrey
N800002–0439. Secret; Immediate; Nodis. Newsom recounted the meeting with Ceau-
sescu in his memoirs, describing Bucharest in January as “one of the drabbest cities I
have ever visited.” (Newsom, Witness to a Changing World, p. 319)
points on Middle East issues. Saunders informed Newsom that because of opposition
to Sadat and Begin, the U.S. Government requested postponement of UN Security Council
deliberations on a resolution dealing with the Palestinian question and that Yassir Arafat
seemed to have decided against forcing a debate. The Department instructed Newsom
to stress in his discussions with Ceausescu that the United States remained committed
to finding a solution, and that the ongoing negotiations on autonomy offer the best
chance for success. The Embassy concluded: “We urge that no initiative be taken to
revive discussion of a resolution to supplement [UNGA Res.] 242 in the next several
prior to this trip to Bucharest. In it Carter commended Ceausescu for speaking forcefully
against the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. See Document 219.

Romania
and Suddarth.4 Ceausescu was joined by Foreign Minister Andrei,
interpreter, and note taker. Major points of discussion are summa-
rized below.
4. Newsom opened discussion by presenting President Carter’s
letter which interpreter read to Ceausescu, who expressed regards and
best wishes to President Carter and indicated Ceausescu has been
working on reply to President’s letter regarding Afghanistan5 which
he will send soon.6
5. General discussions: Ceausescu while being specific on several
points, continued his well-known approach of articulating Romania’s
application of non-aligned principles to general world situation. He
indicated that international situation has worsened as a result of a
process begun long ago and that great powers, including China, should
make efforts to retrieve the situation by pursuing detente, and taking
into account independence and sovereignty of all states. Ceausescu
enumerated following factors resulting in deterioration: (1) slow
progress of SALT II; (2) Camp David has created impression on Soviets
they are being ignored in Mid-East peace process; (3) situation in
Afghanistan, partly result of fact that U.S. in the past only paid attention
to military rather than social and economic matters in Iran.
4 Roscow Seldon “Rocky” Suddarth, Newsom’s Executive Assistant.
Ceausescu, concerning the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. On December 31, in another
letter concerning the NATO dual-track decision, Carter added a handwritten postscript
again expressing concern about Afghanistan and inviting Ceausescu to inform him of
his views. See Document 219. The December 31 letter was transmitted in telegram
6 No response specific to Carter’s December 29 letter on Afghanistan was found.
In telegram 1033 from Bucharest, February 7, Aggrey reported his conversation with
Andrei earlier that day regarding Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko’s visit to
Bucharest. Andrei informed the Ambassador that Ceausescu told Gromyko that Romania
saw Afghanistan as the greatest cause of international tension, that an urgent solution
was necessary, and that such a solution would be cessation of all outside support for
anti-government forces and withdrawal of Soviet troops. Andrei also reported that
Gromyko said Soviet troops would be withdrawn once outside support ceases. (National
in Islamabad reported in telegram 2311 that it received information of a possible media-
tion offer from Romania between Pakistan and the Soviet Union in order to reach an
accommodation on Afghanistan. The offer had been made by Pungan while visiting
Pakistan in February. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800132–
would like to broker the Afghan problem. The Embassy wrote: “While it is clearly not
in a position to settle the dispute, Ceausescu is in his own inimitable way trying to act
as a middleman in order to serve Romania’s national interests, world peace, and his
own ego—all of which are in this instance compatible.” (National Archives, RG 59,
Central Foreign Policy File, D800130–0957)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
6. Afghanistan: Ceausescu was careful to emphasize that in citing
above factors, he was trying to find causes but not rpt not justify Soviet
actions in Afghanistan. He indicated he fails to understand why USSR
sent troops. Ceausescu felt that outside support for anti-regime forces
in Afghanistan was a factor in Soviet decision to intervene. He believes
that a US-Soviet agreement could be reached perhaps, on the basis of
Soviet withdrawal on one hand and cessation of outside support for
anti-regime forces on the other. Ceausescu indicated current US action
against Soviet Union is not rpt not moving process towards a solution;
on the contrary, it could aggravate tensions and have unpredictable
results. In reply, Newsom mentioned that President Carter wants to
continue detente in areas where constructive action is possible, such
as chemical warfare, CTB and CSCE. US response, however, reflects
strong public reaction to Afghanistan situation in which Soviet invasion
has made major change in balance of influence in that area. US President
cannot exclude possibility that Soviets have ambitions in South West
Asia wider than in Afghanistan and US, as a great power, must insure
it has strength to meet such challenges. Newsom emphasized that we
would like to find non-military means of resolving problems but we
cannot be indifferent to the fact that others are using military force.
No strong nation can afford to be unprepared in such situations.
7. Yugoslavia: Ceausescu was relatively up-beat regarding pros-
pects for Yugoslavia. He said “I do not believe that Yugoslavian situa-
tion gives rise to worries,” indicating that the good Yugoslav social
order has good prospects for maintaining Yugoslav independence,
which he implied would be case even following Tito.
8. European security: Ceausescu stressed Romania’s desire to
strengthen European security with particular emphasis on continuing
CSCE. He mentioned specifically that Romania wants a solution to
problems of military disengagement including problem of “nuclear
missiles.” Newsom indicated US support for CSCE and stressed in
larger context that President has not withdrawn SALT II Treaty.
9. Iran: Ceausescu reiterated Romanian view that sanctions are not
most effective means of resolving [garble], chiefly because they will
aggravate difficult Iranian internal economic situation. Newsom
explained that President Carter, because he chose to seek a peaceful
resolution, felt the need to use all UN machinery and such action was
also important to maintain support from an angry US public opinion
for his Iranian policy. Newsom stressed US had postponed formal
implementation of sanctions until Islamic Conference is concluded,
that we welcome apparent election of Bani-Sadr;7 if it appears we can

Romania
make immediate progress on release of hostages, implementation of
sanctions could be reviewed.
10. China: Ceausescu welcomed US-China relations but cautioned
that they not be to detriment of relations with USSR, stressing need
for collaboration if not friendship and avoidance of confrontation. He
also stressed that US-China relationship should not be at expense of
interest of other peoples, implying Kampuchea. In reply, Newsom took
note of his concern but pointed out that US public and Congress want
stronger US relations with China and do not believe we can delay
this development simply because our relations with Soviet Union are
deteriorating. Consequently, our policy to China may seem more posi-
tive under present conditions than is the case, given US-Soviet relations.
11. Mideast: Ceausescu spent considerable proportion of discussion
on Middle East negotiations and criticism of Camp David and U.S.
role. While supporting Egyptian-Israeli steps in Camp David, he said
that “present Camp David course has no chance for success, at least
concerning the Palestinian problem.” He said that U.S. “could do a
lot more on this issue” and that a representative movement towards
comprehensive peace is necessary not only for stability in Middle East
but also for securing normal supply of oil. He decried fact that Jordan,
Syria and PLO have been left out of process. With respect to possibility
of amending 242 to add concept of “Palestine rights”, which Andrei
raised with Under Secretary yesterday,8 Newsom used talking points
in reftel with Ceausescu. Romanian President listened intently but
adhered to position that some parallel action to on-going Camp David
negotiations is necessary. He indicated some way must be developed
to assure Palestinian participation and suggested that this a sphere
where an initiatve could be developed with Soviet participation despite
problems of Afghanistan. He also suggested idea of Geneva type inter-
national conference resumption. (Andrei later told Newsom Romanian
idea was for post-Camp David conference to resolve issues not yet
resolved.)
12. In reply, Newsom spoke about U.S. approach and our desire
for achieving sufficient results in autonomy negotiations to attract Pal-
estinian participation. Ceausescu listened patiently but evinced skep-
tism over results with a Romanian expression roughly equivalent to
sation between Andrei and Newsom which took place earlier that day. (National
rest, January 28, the Embassy expanded on the points made by Andrei in his conversation
with Newsom. The Embassy concluded that“ Romanians clearly seek to pursue as much
of a traditional non-aligned policy as their geographic and political position will permit”
and that Newsom’s discussions with Andrei showed the extent of strain that remains
in Soviet-Romanian relations. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
“inshallah”. Sensing his intense interest in the subject, Newsom prom-
ised to keep Ambassador Aggrey informed as appropriate regarding
progress of Ambassador Linowitz’ negotiations, so that GOR could
be informed.
13. Given Ceausescu’s great stress during discussions on non-inter-
ference of great powers with small nations, Newsom could not resist
temptation to indicate that we are not in a position, regardless of
impression of U.S. power, to force or order another nation to do what
it does not consider to be in its interest. We have the difficult and
lonely task of persuading Israel to grapple with complex autonomy
issues as well as questions of settlements and status of Jerusalem and
to achieve sufficient results to bring Palestinians into negotiations.
Ceausescu interrupted Newsom’s presentation to point out that Roma-
nia also is addressing these problems with the Israelis and Arabs.
14. Comment: We did not detect any significant change in Ceauses-
cu’s well-known position on international issues during discussions.
His criticism of Soviet behaviour in Afghanistan came through strongly,
although carefully couched in terms of non-alignment and balanced
but implied criticism of U.S. security measures in reaction to Afghan
situation. Only new elements were Ceausescu’s suggestion that U.S.
acquiesce to an initiative regarding Palestinian rights which would
involve the Soviets and his stress on CSCE issue of military disengage-
ment with specific reference to nuclear missiles. Ceausescu received
Under Secretary graciously and engaged in a lively give and take on
the major current international issues. He seemed genuinely pleased
with letter and consultation. We believe he has a better idea of current
U.S. policy assessments which could be helpful in permitting him to
chart accurately the course of cautious non-alignment which he is
pursuing despite proximity to the Soviet Union.
Aggrey
222.
Editorial Note
On February 24, 1980, Nicolae Ion Horodinca, a Romanian intelli-
gence officer, together with his wife and infant son, drove to a U.S.
Army barracks in the Washington area and asked for asylum. The
Department informed the Embassy in Bucharest in telegram 50348,
February 25, of a February 24 Washington Post article describing the

Romania
event. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800098–
0113) Mrs. Horodinca returned to the Romanian Embassy in Washing-
ton after her husband’s defection, where she was immediately recalled
to Bucharest. In telegram 56600 to Bucharest, March 2, the Department
informed the Embassy that after meeting with her, Department and
Immigration officials were satisfied that she was returning to Bucharest
on her own free will. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
File, P870105–0275) On her way to the airport, however, Mrs. Horodinca
collapsed, was taken to a hospital, and subsequently decided to remain
in the United States.
On March 4, the Embassy in Bucharest reported in telegram 1749
that Acting Foreign Minister Constantin Oancea had called U.S. Ambas-
sador Rudolph Aggrey to the Foreign Ministry to deliver a démarche
decrying U.S. Government actions at the airport and accusing Washing-
ton of unduly pressuring Mrs. Horodinca to remain in the United
States. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P870105–
during his conversation with Oancea, Romanian President Nicolae
Ceausescu had called the Foreign Ministry to transmit a personal mes-
sage to President Jimmy Carter. Ceausescu’s message issued a personal
request to Carter, asking him “to take steps to assure that the Romanian
Ambassador and/or another Romanian diplomat be given access to
[Mrs. Horodinca] and allowed to speak with her immediately. She
should leave the hospital and be brought to Romania immediately. If
what we request is accorded we will take no public notice of this
incident. If we do not receive a satisfactory reply today we will have
to make public all of the pressures that the US exerted upon Mrs.
Horodinca as well as other acts of a similar character taken by the
U.S.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P870105–
0251) Romanian Ambassador Nicolae Ionescu met with Assistant to
the President for National Security Affairs Zbigniew Brzezinski and
Secretary of State Cyrus Vance on March 5 to further protest what the
Romanian Government saw as U.S. Government actions to force Mrs.
Horodinca to change her mind. The Department reported in telegram
59850 to Bucharest, March 5, that both Brzezinski and Vance had
stressed to Ionescu that the recent developments were a surprise, that
the U.S. Government would respect Mrs. Horodinca’s decision what-
ever it may be, and that the Romaninan Government should not allow
the incident to cloud the otherwise improving relationship between
the two countries. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
File, P870105–0291)
As a result of Horodinca’s defection, Romanian officials recalled all
officers from the United States. The defection also reinforced Romanian
perceptions of a diminishing special place in U.S. foreign policy and

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
a belief that the Central Intelligence Agency wanted to sabotage the
U.S.-Romanian special relationship. (Intelligence Information Cable,
March 25; Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Mate-
rial, Brzezinski Office File, Country Chron File, Box 45, Romania: 1980)
Forwarding the report to Brzezinski on March 28, Stephen Larrabee of
the National Security Council Staff, recommended that Washington
reduce some of the suspicion by rescheduling Vance’s visit to Bucharest
as part of the high-level consultations on which Ceausescu placed great
emphasis, and by receiving Deputy Prime Minister Cornel Burtica at
the White House during his April visit to Washington. (Ibid.)
223.
Memorandum From Stephen Larrabee of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, March 14, 1980
SUBJECT
Romanian Request for Military Supply Relationship (S)
As I noted in my Evening Report (Tab B),2 the Romanians have
again approached us about entering into a military supply relationship
with them. Our military attache, acting on instructions, met with
Romanian MOD Chief of Intelligence, Admiral Dinu (see cable at Tab
A)3 on March 5 to hear what the Romanians had in mind. In essence,
Admiral Dinu reaffirmed the approach the Romanians had made sev-
eral years ago when they had provided the U.S. with a list of desired
was sent to Kimmitt. A stamped notation indicates Brzezinski saw the memorandum.
2 Dated March 4. Attached but not printed.
3 Not attached. The Defense Attaché in Bucharest reported his conversation with
the Romanian officer in a March 6 telegram to the Defense Intelligence Agency at the
Joint Chiefs of Staff. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Europe,

Romania
equipment.4 Admiral Dinu stated that as far as he knew, the earlier
request was still open and that the Romanians would like technical
assistance regardless of licensing arrangements which would enhance
their defense capability. He acknowledged the difficulty in establishing
such a relationship. What he sought was simply an indication that the
U.S. might be willing to help. (S)
Our attache limited himself to describing the difficulties involved
but made no commitment one way or the other. (S)
Dinu’s approach most assuredly had high-level backing and could
not have been undertaken without Ceausescu’s approval. At present,
DoD is not ready to ask Brown to take any specific action. In addition
to the political implications and difficulties, there are major legal and
financial problems associated with transferring such technology to a
Warsaw Pact country. Indeed, because of our emphasis on human
rights, the difficulties today are even greater than they were several
years ago when the Romanians first made the approach. Nonetheless,
the Romanian offer remains interesting, and I do not feel we should
entirely shut the door on the Romanians.5 (S)
4 In a March 14 memorandum to Vance, Vest and O’Donohue described the Roman-
ian approach and offered background information on the initial approach the Romanians
made in 1975. The discussions on establishing a military supply relationship ended in
1976 when the Romanians were told the United States faced legal constraints in establish-
ing such a relationship with a Warsaw Pact country. (National Archives, RG 59, Office
of the Under Secretary for Security Assistance, Science and Technology, Chron Files
to Romania in November 1978, Deputy Minister of Defense Vasile Ionel also brought
up the issue. (National Archives, RG 59, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Office of
Analysis for the Commonwealth and Eastern Europe, Office Subject Files, 1965–1980,
5 Brzezinski wrote at the bottom of the memorandum: “DA, shouldn’t we have a
mini-SCC on this?” David Aaron wrote in response “OK, schedule it.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
224.
Memorandum From Stephen Larrabee of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) and the President’s
Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Aaron)1
Washington, April 4, 1980
SUBJECT
Romanian Interest in Military Supply Relationship (U)
As you know, the Romanians recently raised with our air attache
in Bucharest the question of establishing a military supply relationship
with us (Tab A).2 With an eye to an eventual mini-SCC, I met with
Barry and Siena the other day to discuss our response and to get a
sense of the views of the various agencies and services. (S)
There was general agreement that the initiation of a military supply
relationship with Bucharest would be a sticky wicket and that we
should proceed very cautiously. While Romania and Yugoslavia share
similar views on many issues, especially resistance to Soviet hegemony,
there are significant differences which make the establishment of a
military relationship with Romania more difficult—and more risky:
—Romania remains a member of the Warsaw Pact, albeit a reluctant
one; the danger of technology transfer therefore is higher.
—The bulk of the Romanian officer corps was trained in the Soviet
Union and unlike Yugoslavia, they have no familiarity with U.S. weap-
ons systems or procurement procedures.
—The political situation in Romania is shaky. While Ceausescu
has a firm hand on the reigns of power at the moment, there is consider-
able latent disenchantment with his increasingly capricious and irra-
tional rule—as well as the deterioration of the economy over the last
few years. Should Ceausescu die or be removed, a return to a more
orthodox foreign policy, one more closely attuned to Soviet interests,
cannot be entirely excluded.
—Romania maintains a harsh internal system and has a poor
human rights record (in comparison to Yugoslavia’s), a fact which
would provoke opposition in Congress. (C)
At the same time there was a general consensus that we have an
interest in encouraging the Romanians to diversify their arms supply
and reduce their dependence on Moscow. The group felt that we should
A copy was sent to Kimmitt. Aaron wrote at the top of the first page: “ZB—Very
interesting and delicate. Bob [Kimmitt] should emphasize no leaks. DA.”
2 See Document 223.

Romania
therefore not close the door entirely—especially since the succession
struggle in the Soviet Union may offer an opportunity for Bucharest
to increase its freedom of maneuver. At a minimum we could quietly
and discreetly discuss with the Romanians how our procurement sys-
tem works and apprise them of the major legislative requirements
without making any specific commitments. This might help to prevent
some of the problems that have arisen with the Yugoslavs (whom
we briefed too late in the game) while at the same time keeping the
door slightly ajar for sales at a later date should circumstances prove
propitious. (S)
We should be sure, however, that any moves with Romania do
not jeopardize our military relationship with the Yugoslavs, and before
proceeding too far, it would be wise to obtain Belgrade’s reaction to
our establishing a military supply relationship with Bucharest. While
the Yugoslavs would probably support efforts to aid Romania (with
whom they themselves are cooperating to build a joint fighter, Orao)
they might feel that such efforts on our part might expose them to
increased Soviet pressure and thus prefer we not sell arms to Bucharest.
At any rate, at some point we should discreetly seek their views. (S)
At the moment no agency or service has a firm view on how we
should proceed. PM/EUR is working on a memo to Vance setting out
the political, legal and legislative implications of the establishment of
any military supply relationship with Bucharest, which should be ready
in several weeks. Defense has prepared a memo (Tab B) outlining US
and COCOM restraints.3 I will keep you informed as work proceeds. (S)
After State has finished its memo to Vance, I think the issue should
be raised at a VBB and then a mini-SCC should be held.4 (C)
3 Attached at Tab B is a undated and unsigned Department of Defense memorandum
from the Office of International Security Affairs prepared for the Deputy Assistant
Secretary of Defense for European and NATO Affairs. The memorandum outlined the
DOD position regarding a military supply relationship with Romania suggesting that
sales of dual-use items on the Commodity Control List and the COCOM International
list could be sold to the Romanian military without congressional approval, but that
congressional notification was advisable. The memorandum further informed Siena that
the USG had asked COCOM partners to extend a more flexible treatment to Romania,
but that no consensus had been reached. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff
4 Brzezinski underlined “VBB and then a mini-SCC” and wrote: “OK. ZB. (good
memo).”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
225.
Memorandum Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1
Washington, April 7, 1980
ROMANIA: A SITUATION REPORT
Summary
Romania, as it has developed under the direction of state and Communist
Party chief Nicolae Ceausescu, has become an anomaly among Communist
countries. It combines such “orthodox” attributes as full membership in the
Soviet alliance system, party domination of domestic political life and a highly
centralized economy, with a freewheeling and relatively independent foreign
policy and a one-man dictatorship that in its personalization and concentration
of power harks back to Romania’s pre-war, monarchical past. There are signs
that Ceausescu’s authoritarian and austere domestic policies are wearing thin
with the Romanian public and that his independent-minded foreign policies
are in danger of becoming hostage to Romania’s mounting economic problems.
Ceausescu has thus far managed to keep his programs intact despite external
and internal pressures by dint of his remarkable ability to gauge both the
limits of Soviet tolerance and the extent to which his people will bear privations.
His political and diplomatic skills will increasingly be put to the test as
Romania enters the 1980s.
Foreign Policies
Ceausescu’s principal foreign policy objective is to achieve as much
independence from Moscow as possible, given Romania’s geopolitical
realities. The basic strategies employed by Bucharest in pursuit of that
goal are to resist those Soviet policies that promote dominance over
Romania, while avoiding any action so antagonistic to Moscow as
to provoke retaliation, and to cultivate relations with as many non-
Communist countries and independent-minded Communist parties as
possible to counter Soviet pressure. By taking this course, Romania has
succeeded in gradually extending the limits of acceptable autonomous
activity, but it has also come into conflict with Soviet policy preferences.
Romanian-Soviet relations, as a result, have come under some strain,
particularly during the past two years.
Since Romania’s leaders proclaimed their country’s foreign policy
independence in the early 1960s, one of their major preoccupations has
dential. The memorandum was requested by the Department of Commerce. It was
prepared in the Office of Political Analysis and coordinated with the Office of Eco-
nomic Research.

Romania
been to ward off Soviet pressure for further integration into the Warsaw
Pact and the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance (CEMA). Ceau-
sescu has often stated that military blocs are an anachronism and has
actively campaigned for the simultaneous dissolution of both NATO
and the Warsaw Pact. Romania has not participated in joint Pact exer-
cises with combat troops since 1962 and does not allow such exercises
on Romanian soil. Romanian resistance to greater military integration
within the Pact reached its high point in November 1978 at a meeting
of the Pact’s Political Consultative Committee in Moscow, where
Ceausescu opposed Soviet attempts to force an increase in the defense
budgets of member states and to centralize control over Pact military
forces. Bucharest has subsequently assumed a more accommodating
stance toward Moscow on military issues, but has not retreated signifi-
cantly from the stands it took at Moscow.
Romanian opposition to economic integration within CEMA is also
long-standing. Indeed, it was the primary issue over which Romania
first broke with the Soviets. Last summer, at a major CEMA conference
in Moscow, Romania fought—with only limited success—Soviet
attempts to give the organization supranational powers in the areas of
decision-making and conducting negotiations with international orga-
nizations. Bucharest further distanced itself from its CEMA partners
this year by concluding a major trade pact with the EC—in direct
defiance of the Soviet preference for a multilateral approach toward
relations with the EC.
The Romanians have also clashed with the Soviets on a variety of
international issues they consider threatening to their foreign policy
autonomy, including the Vietnamese invasion of Kampuchea and the
Soviet intervention in Afghanistan. Bucharest’s opposition to the Viet-
namese takeover in Kampuchea derives at least in part from Romania’s
close relations with China—the ousted Pol Pot regime’s principal ally.
Bucharest has opposed the Soviet move into Afghanistan because of
the obvious implications this latest demonstration of Moscow’s willing-
ness to intervene in a friendly or allied regime holds for Romania. The
Romanians also fear the resultant deterioration in East-West relations
will be detrimental to Romania’s interests. Ceausescu, who advocates
a negotiated solution to the crisis, is apparently coming under pressure
to fall into line with the Soviets on this issue.
Romania is highly vulnerable to a variety of Soviet pressures,
including economic pressure. The USSR supplies about a third of Roma-
nia’s total consumption of iron ore and, along with Poland and Czecho-
slovakia, about half its coking coal. As a result of Romania’s worsening
energy crisis and hard currency shortage, the potential for Soviet lever-
age has probably grown. Moscow has agreed to sell Romania a small
amount of crude oil for hard currency—approximately one million

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
tons—in 1980 and may be dangling offers of increased future deliveries
before the Romanians. We have no evidence to date, however, that
Moscow has made a concerted effort to apply the economic levers at
its command.
Romania’s growing dependence on foreign oil—it now imports
about half its crude oil needs—may be forcing a change in Bucharest’s
Middle East policy. Ceausescu has traditionally pursued an “even-
handed” approach toward the major disputants in the region. Through
his efforts to mediate their differences he has earned a reputation as
an effective behind-the-scenes arbitrator of international disputes—a
role he clearly relishes. Ceausescu helped arrange the historic Sadat-
Begin meeting in 1977 and is now seeking to bridge differences between
Egypt and the other Arab states. There are signs, however, that Romania
may be tilting slightly—at least in its rhetoric—toward the more mili-
tant forces in the region, possibly out of concern to retain access to
Middle Eastern oil.
Bucharest has actively courted Third World countries in order
to gain political and economic support for its independent policies.
Romania is particularly interested in playing a role in the Nonaligned
Movement—with which it now has guest status—but is unlikely to
increase its influence substantially as long as it is a member of the
Warsaw Pact.
Ceausescu has also sought closer relations with the West to buttress
Romania’s defense against Soviet domination. He clearly believes that
the “special relationship” he has sought to develop with Washington
is especially valuable—both politically and economically—in this effort.
Economic cooperation protocols signed in March with the Occidental
Petroleum Corporation illustrate the benefits Romania hopes to derive
from this relationship.
Domestic Policies
Ceausescu’s independent and nationalistic foreign policies strike
a responsive chord at home, where anti-Russian feeling runs high.
Indeed, domestic political considerations have probably been a major
motivating factor in many of Ceausescu’s anti-Soviet actions. Ceauses-
cu’s domestic policies of rapid industrialization and authoritarian inter-
nal controls, however, have been decidedly unpopular.
As a result of the regime’s emphasis over the past decade on capital
accumulation and investment, the standard of living has remained the
lowest among Warsaw Pact states while the economy’s growth rates
are the highest. As domestic reserves of energy and other key raw
materials have become depleted, however, even the rate of economic
growth has begun to falter.
In the face of mounting economic difficulties, the regime has initi-
ated a number of belt-tightening measures. Prices have been increased

Romania
over the past two years for energy and various consumer goods and
an energy conservation program has been implemented that sharply
limits public consumption.
Ceausescu has sought to improve economic performance by
launching a program to reform economic management. The program
seeks to spur productivity by tying workers’ salaries and bonuses more
closely to enterprise profits and to increase production efficiency by
phasing out success indicators that reward managers for lavish material
expenditures. Ceausescu is also trying to mobilize public support for
his economic programs by creating an aura of mass involvement in the
political process. These strategies are flawed, however, by Ceausescu’s
reluctance to yield essential control over economic and political
decision-making.
Public reaction to these measures so far has been restrained, but
the regime is undoubtedly concerned that consumer discontent could
erupt and touch off disturbances in other troubled sectors of Romanian
society. Workers have shown some restiveness, essentially over bread
and butter issues. A widespread slowdown by disgruntled coal miners
occurred in the summer of 1977, and sporadic incidents of industrial
unrest have come to light since then. Tensions between the Romanians
and their large Hungarian minority have boiled over occasionally,
though the Magyars seem quiet at the moment. Small dissidence move-
ments have also emerged among Romanian intellectuals and certain
religious groups in recent years, but have not posed a significant prob-
lem for the regime. The chances of general disturbances seem remote,
but the regime has betrayed its nervousness by the quickness with
which it has moved during the past year to squelch the smallest mani-
festations of dissent.
Ceausescu’s dominance of the Romanian political scene, which
was reaffirmed last November at the 12th Congress of the Romanian
Communist Party, has been demonstrated during the past year by the
extensive personnel changes he has overseen on both the national and
local levels, under the rubric of “cadre rotations.” In the latest round—
in late March—the most prominent winner was his wife, Elena, who
was elevated to the post of First Deputy Prime Minister. A member of
the party’s prestigious Permanent Bureau, Mrs. Ceausescu is thought
by some to be the most powerful political figure in Romania after
her husband.
Through periodic cadre rotations—which keep party and govern-
ment functionaries off balance and under control—and manipulation
of the bureaucratic structure, Ceausescu has amassed enormous power.
He now rules the country through a small group of loyal lieutenants
and appears able to bypass the regime’s traditional power centers.
Ceausescu’s autocratic ruling style and the personality cult that
enshrines him and his wife appear to have provoked some resentment

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
within the bureaucracy, possibly reflected in the stinging attack leveled
against him by an aged party veteran at the party congress in Novem-
ber. There is no evidence, however, of any organized opposition to
Ceausescu or of any serious disagreement—within the apparatus—to
the basic thrust of his policies.
[1 line not declassified]
226.
Memorandum of Conversation1
SUBJECT
Vice President’s Meeting with Romanian Deputy Prime Minister
Cornel Burtica (U)
PARTICIPANTS
The Vice President
Phillip Klutznick, Secretary of Commerce
O. Rudolph Aggrey, U.S. Ambassador to Romania
H. Allen Holmes, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs
Denis Clift, Special Assistant to the Vice President
Frank Tumminia, Officer in Charge of Romanian Affairs, Department of State
F. Stephen Larrabee, NSC Staff Member (Notetaker)
Cornel Burtica, Romanian Deputy Prime Minister
Nicolae Ionescu, Romanian Ambassador to the U.S.
Boris Ranghet, Counselor, Romanian Embassy
Ion Timofei, Interpreter
The Vice President opened the meeting by welcoming Deputy Prime
Minister Burtica to Washington. He informed him that the President
was aware that Burtica was carrying a letter from President Ceausescu
and that the President had asked him to bring Burtica by to deliver
the letter.2 (U)
Foreign Countries—Romania, (1980). Secret. Drafted by Larrabee. The meeting took place
in the Vice President’s office in the West Wing of the White House.
2 Ceausescu’s letter, dated April 17, stressed Romania’s desire to strengthen security,
collaboration, and stability in Europe through the CSCE process. Ceausescu also
expressed his belief that a solution to the Middle East could only be reached after Israeli
withdrawal from the occupied territories and the creation of a Palestinian state. (Carter
Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, President’s Correspondence with

Romania
Deputy Prime Minister Burtica thanked the Vice President. He said
that he had had good discussions with Secretary Klutznick, who was
an old friend of Romania. He had also had productive discussions at
State and with STR.3 (At this point the meeting was interrupted, and
the Vice President took Deputy Prime Minister Burtica in to see the
President, who accepted the letter and asked Minister Burtica to convey
his greetings to President Ceausescu.)4 (C)
Resuming the discussions again, the Vice President stated that the
President would respond to President Ceausescu’s letter through our
Ambassador in Bucharest5 and that he, the Vice President, would report
his conversations with Burtica directly to the President. Burtica’s visit,
in his view, was an indication of the good relations between Romania
and the United States. Recalling President Ceausescu’s visit to the
United States in 1978, he said that the United States took a great deal
of satisfaction from the strengthening of bilateral relations which had
occurred in the interval. As far as trade was concerned, he noted that
he had been one of the original authors of MFN for Romania. This, in
his view, was a symbol with some substance and an indication that
we were now on a good course. (C)
Deputy Prime Minister Burtica thanked the Vice President very
much, stating that the Romanians too were highly appreciative of the
development of good relations between the two countries. Since Presi-
dent Carter’s meeting with President Ceausescu, relations had devel-
oped considerably. The current session of the Joint Commission was
a good example of the way in which both countries could cooperate.
He stressed, however, that both countries needed to find new possibili-
ties for expanding cooperation. After the granting of MFN, commercial
exchanges had developed favorably, but it was unwieldy to have to
Christopher and Burtica at the Department. Burtica, the telegram reported, “raised
bilateral issues of U.S. export controls, access for Romanian vessels to Hampton Roads,
and multi-year MFN.” After renewing Romania’s request for access of its vessels to
Hampton Roads, Burtica was informed that the administration had reviewed the issue
intensively but that it was not possible to agree to the Romanian request. The two officials
also discussed the hostage crisis in Iran, the Middle East, and Afghanistan. (National
Klutznick and Burtica on April 22 was reported in telegram 114649 to Bucharest, May
Libary, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary, April 23, 1980)
request a meeting with Andrei and deliver Carter’s response to Ceausescu. Carter assured
Ceausescu that, despite deteriorating U.S.-Soviet relations, he was “determined to main-
tain a dialogue with the countries of Eastern Europe and to pursue a differentiated
approach to each of them,” and in particular with Romania. (National Archives, RG 59,
Central Foreign Policy File, D800255–1010)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
review the question of MFN each year. The Romanians wanted to see
a solution of the MFN question on a permanent basis, as in the case
of China. (C)
The Vice President noted that the U.S. favored this as well. The
question was really one of timing. There was considerable positive
feeling toward Romania, but the question was really when we should
Burtica emphasized that the Congressmen with whom he had met
felt that the time was appropriate to move on the question of MFN.
He had found considerable good feeling toward Romania in Congress,
particularly as a result of Romania’s independent stand on Afghanistan.
Senator Jackson in particular was positively disposed toward granting
MFN on a permanent basis.6 (S)
At this point Secretary Klutznick interjected that Senator Jackson
was favorably disposed to yearly renewal not multiyear renewal. (C)
The Vice President commented that perhaps the attitude in Congress
was changing and that we ought to look into this. The Vice President
also noted that when Ceausescu came in 1975 he had gotten into a tiff
with Senator Jackson and that Jackson had found that Ceausescu was
not easily pushed. (S)
Burtica replied that in the meantime Senator Jackson had been in
Romania and had come away with a positive impression. (C)
The Vice President promised that the U.S. would take another look
at the question of granting MFN to Romania on a permanent basis. (S)
Turning to economic relations, Burtica commented that Romania
had a large number of very important negotiations, especially with
General Electric.7 If this deal were to be concluded, it would extend
to the year 2000. The Romanians basically agreed on all points except
counter-trade. Burtica stressed that such a deal would be easier to
conclude if MFN was granted on a permanent basis. This created
uncertainties. (S)
The Vice President asked if Burtica meant that Romania needed
access to U.S. markets. (C)
6 Burtica’s conversation with members of Congress, including Senator Jackson, was
reported in telegram 121462 to Bucharest, May 8. “While discussing this year’s MFN
waiver” the Department reported, “DPM Burtica never confronted Jackson on the issue
of multi-year MFN. We do not know if this was by design or simply inadvertence, but
Jackson was prepared to tell the Romanians that no chance existed for change in the
trade legislation or procedures to permit multi-year MFN.” (National Archives, RG 59,
Central Foreign Policy File, D800227–1123)
7 In an undated memorandum (drafted on March 28) from Vest to Clift, Vest summa-
rized U.S. support for General Electric’s proposal to supply the Romanians with two
turbine generators for their nuclear plant at Cernavoda. (Carter Library, Donated Mate-
rial, Papers of Walter F. Mondale, Box 67, Foreign Countries—Romania, (1980))

Romania
Burtica responded that Romania had to be able to pay for what
they had to buy in the United States and that was why they needed
MFN. Romania also had an important joint venture with Control Data
Corporation. (C)
The Vice President joked that the Minister was very smart; Control
Data was from Minnesota. (C)
In referring to contacts with U.S. firms, Burtica noted that the two
main problems were with MFN and export licenses. (C)
Secretary Klutznick replied that the U.S. had the issue of licenses
under review. (U)
Turning to international affairs, Burtica said that he would briefly
like to inform the Vice President about Ceausescu’s views on a number
of important world problems. Romania was concerned about the deteri-
oration of the international situation and felt that we should do every-
thing possible not to allow it to further deteriorate. There were a number
of factors which had contributed to this. However, he stated that he
did not want to apportion blame. It was important, he stressed, that
we try to resolve matters by political means. In regard to CSCE, Roma-
nia felt that everything had to be done to ensure that the Madrid
Conference took place. He then noted that there were a number of
steps which could be taken to improve the atmosphere. The Romanians
hoped that SALT II could be ratified. They also felt that theater nuclear
weapons should be withdrawn before they were installed. (C)
Burtica stressed that Romania did not want an imbalance in Europe,
but rather wanted to see new steps toward military disengagement in
Europe as well as steps toward a reduction of armaments and defense
spending. Regarding Afghanistan, he emphasized the need for a politi-
cal solution, a cessation of foreign support for anti-government forces,
and a withdrawal of Soviet troops. He stressed that the problem in
Afghanistan could not be solved by pressure tactics. The Soviets would
not yield to pressure. Only a dialogue could lead to a solution. (C)
Regarding Iran, Burtica said that Romania wanted to see a reduc-
tion in tensions. Economic sanctions would only lead to greater rigidity,
both in Afghanistan and Iran. President Bani-Sadr, he said, was having
problems with the students. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs, however,
was taking a more realistic position. The Romanians believed that
pressure simply fed the most extremist forces. (C)
Burtica then turned to the question of a new economic order, noting
that Romania desired to cooperate with the American side to find
practical solutions. Such cooperation was necessary because otherwise
conflicts in the region would increase. (C)
The Vice President thanked Minister Burtica for his observations.
He stated that the United States was very interested to see GE get

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
the contract. This would help to strengthen and broaden the bilateral
relationship. As far as Madrid was concerned, the United States wanted
to see the follow-up conference on security and cooperation in Europe
(CSCE) go forward and was planning to attend the Madrid session as
scheduled. The Vice President regretted that it had been necessary to
defer SALT II, noting that after the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan
there was no way we could have obtained ratification. He assured
Minister Burtica, however, that as soon as it was politically feasible
the Administration would try to get the SALT II Agreement ratified. (C)
The Vice President then turned to the question of TNF, pointing
out that for nearly fourteen years the question had been quiescent.
However, recently the Soviets had begun deploying the SS–20, which
was a MIRVed, mobile, highly accurate missile, at a rate of several a
month. They had also begun deploying the BACKFIRE bomber which
was a theater nuclear weapon. As a result, NATO had no choice but
to take the decision which it took at the December 12th Ministerial. (C)
The Vice President stressed that we continued to attach importance
to MBFR and hoped to eventually see a Phase I Agreement. As far as
Afghanistan was concerned, he noted that the U.S. position was well
known and that there was no need to repeat it for Minister Burtica.
Iran was a heart-breaking situation. The hostages were innocent victims
and their captivity was a violation of international law. The United
States had been patient and restrained. We had had repeated talks with
Iran. The Iranian government had repeatedly been unwilling or unable
to deliver on its commitments and the situation was becoming almost
intolerable. As a consequence, we had asked our friends to join with
us to impose sanctions under the UN Resolution. We were trying to
force the Iranians to see the folly of their ways. However, it was becom-
ing increasingly clear that the Iranians had no intention of letting the
hostages go and were determined to humiliate the United States. He
assured Deputy Prime Minister Burtica that he would report the Minis-
ter’s views to the President. He then asked the Minister to give his
views on what would happen in Yugoslavia after Tito died. (C)
Minister Burtica stressed that in the Romanian view there would
be no major changes. The Yugoslavs had achieved a system that main-
tained a balance and satisfied the needs of the different republics.
Sometimes the various nationalities quarreled among themselves, but
they were united against any outside threat. The real problem in the
long run would be whether a genuinely collective leadership would
emerge or whether there would be a return to one-man rule. (C)
The Vice President commented that it was hard to see how anyone
could possibly replace Tito. (C)
Minister Burtica agreed, but noted that in China people had thought
that it would be hard to replace Mao. In Yugoslavia some personalities

Romania
would be found. In this connection, he cited the example of Stane
Dolanc. Dolanc was an extremely able and good politician. Before he
became Executive Secretary of the Presidium, no one had known him.
However, he had done an excellent job. Thus, in Minister Burtica’s
view, it would be possible to find some personality eventually who
could lead Yugoslavia. He did not think that the Soviets would inter-
vene directly in Yugoslav internal affairs because the Soviets knew
that the Yugoslavs, like the Romanians, would not sit idly by and allow
themselves to be occupied. (S)
The Vice President concluded the meeting by thanking Minister
Burtica for his visit and conveyed President Carter’s best wishes to
President Ceausescu. (U)
227.
Memorandum of Conversation1
Belgrade, May 7, 1980
Vice President’s Meeting with President Ceausescu from Romania,
Wednesday, May 7, 1980, Belgrade, Yugoslavia
Vice President: Mr. President, the loss of Tito is a great blow for
Yugoslavia. It is our hope that Yugoslavia will continue to be a strong
and independent nation.
President Ceausescu: Every action taken by Tito is lasting and dura-
ble. We believe the same policies will be further developed in the future.
Vice President: That is our hope. I met with President Kolisevski this
afternoon,2 and I reaffirmed U.S. support and renewed the President’s
pledge to work with Yugoslavia.
President Ceausescu: We do not consider there is any particular
problem with either Yugoslav policy or security. We really believe the
Yugoslav leaders will continue to promote the same policies developed
by Tito.
Bilateral Meetings. Secret; Nodis. Following Tito’s death on May 4, Mondale traveled
to Belgrade to attend the funeral as Carter’s representative. Clift forwarded the memoran-
dum to Dodson on May 13 for further distribution.
2 See Document 290.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
But, in international life today there are many complicated issues.
I see a serious deterioration of the international situation at present.
What should be done to stop this course toward tension and strain
and to search, instead, to solutions?
Vice President: Mr. President, when we came into office, I doubt
that any Administration was more interested in detente than our own.
We worked on SALT, MBFR, CTB, and liberalization of trade with the
USSR. But it has proven difficult to maintain this policy. With the
invasion of Afghanistan, attitudes in our country were poisoned. If we
were to bring the SALT II treaty to a vote now it would be defeated.
I cite Afghanistan as the central problem in the world today. But,
your point is valid. We have to seek a more stable, secure world. The
independence your government has shown is important. The President
appreciates your advice. He asked that I meet with you and convey
his appreciation for the independence you have shown as a responsible
actor on the international scene.
President Ceausescu: The fact is that many problems have accumu-
lated in the world. If SALT II had been ratified last year, this might
have influenced a number of events. Of course, events in Afghanistan
have contributed to a worsening of the situation. Those events are only
part of a longstanding process. I believe that in Afghanistan a political
solution is necessary, not a course leading to further tension. A political
solution pre-supposes a cessation of force, with no more outside forces
and with withdrawal of Soviet troops. My view is that under present
circumstances efforts should be made to have contacts and talks, first
between the USA and the USSR. It is necessary to take care to observe
the independence of all peoples and the renunciation of force. I believe
that account should be taken of statements by the Soviet leadership
that they are ready to withdraw forces if there is a cessation of activities
by outside forces.
We have to prepare carefully for the European Security Meeting
in Madrid this year. In my opinion we should do everything possible
to overcome the present state of tension in the world. To be frank, I
have the impression that the United States and the Soviet Union have
engaged themselves in policies that further divide the two countries.
And, it is not for me to emphasize the important role the US and USSR
have in international life. It is also a fact that an increasing number of
states have equality and independence. My main concern is that the
current situation might get out of hand and reach a point where it
would be difficult to step back.
Vice President: Afghanistan is important, and we are trying to get the
Soviets to reconsider. They have used vague language on withdrawal,
language similar to that they used in Czechoslovakia 12 years ago. One
searches in vain for a single justification of the Soviet invasion. As

Romania
a result the tension is regrettably there. I will report your views to
President Carter.
President Ceausescu: Please convey my greetings and best wishes
to President Carter.
I understand the present problems are complex and complicated.
Under the circumstances, the USSR can’t use Afghanistan for a broader
objective. I don’t wish to offer any guarantee on behalf of the USSR
(laughter). However, I have discussed this with Gromyko, and he says
the USSR should be believed that it has no other intentions.
Vice President: I don’t believe it.
President Ceausescu: It must be proven by the facts. There must be
respect for the independence of Afghanistan. If Afghanistan’s neigh-
bors could be counseled, it would be helpful to arrive at an
understanding.
Vice President: If I understand you, you are saying the Soviets
should get out, others should get out and leave it to the Afghans.
President Ceausescu: The Soviets do declare they are ready to with-
draw under such conditions.
Vice President: They use weasel words. They want a government
compliant to Soviet wishes if the USSR is to withdraw.
President Ceausescu: Since 1921, the Soviets have had influence and
have had a military mission in Afghanistan. We want to work to
find solutions.
Vice President: We do not support the idea of a government hostile
to the USSR, but it has to be a government that does not have an
occupying Soviet army.
President Ceausescu: The situation is a little bit more complicated.
Without Iran we would not have had Afghanistan. We have a situation
where certain forces, religious forces are moving around, taking
strength in the feudal country of Afghanistan. The entry of Soviet
troops was a result of this Islamic movement supported by outside
forces. Another reason for the troop entry was the potential danger for
a similar movement in one of the Soviet republics adjoining Afghani-
stan. This is why all outside support should cease.
Vice President: I appreciate having your views, Mr. President.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
228.
Memorandum From Stephen Larrabee and Robert Kimmitt
of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s
Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, June 10, 1980
SUBJECT
VBB: Military Supply Relationship with Romania (S)
As you know, the Romanians recently raised with our Air Attache
in Bucharest the question of establishing a military supply relationship
with us.2 Both State and Defense have completed internal studies of
the issue. Defense favors moving ahead with a modest relationship,
while State is divided. Nimetz and EUR feel we should let the Romani-
ans down gently;3 PM agrees with Defense. Christopher also feels we
should consult with the allies before making any decision.4 Defense,
however, argues we should make our own decision and then talk to
the allies. (S)
There are thus two issues:
—do we wish to initiate a military supply relationship with the
Romanians
—do we consult with the allies before or after making our
decision (S)
for action.
3 In a May 12 memorandum to Christopher, Nimetz recommended that the United
States consult with its Western Allies before making a decision on establishing a military
supply relationship with Romania. Nimetz cautioned that congressional opposition
would be fierce given Romania’s human rights record and that establishing such a
relationship with a Warsaw Pact country would “send very strange signals to the Western
Europeans whom we continually exhort to increase their defense efforts to meet the
Warsaw Pact buildup.” Nimetz cautioned that “Romania doesn’t have the dollars to
buy very much; nothing we provide will change the scenario if the Soviets invade”
and that “a Western European supply relationship might be more effective and less
controversial for a start.” (National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Under Secretary for
Security Assistance, Science and Technology, Chron Files, Speeches, and Papers of Lucy
Chron, May 1980)
4 In a May 6 memorandum to Christopher, Vest and Bartholomew sought a decision
on the Department’s position. Stating that Romanian motives for seeking a military
supply relationship remained unclear, Vest and Bartholomew estimated that the Soviet
invasion of Afghanistan and tension in the Warsaw Pact toward Bucharest might have
increased Romanian anxiety. (Ibid.) Christopher decided on Allied consultations prior
to responding to Bucharest.

Romania
We strongly feel that we should not rush into this and that we need
to better understand the political, legal and legislative implications of
establishing any military supply relationship before we proceed fur-
ther.5 There are a number of reasons for advocating caution:
—the danger of technology transfer from Romania to the USSR is
higher than was the case with Yugoslavia
—the bulk of the Romanian officer corps was trained in the Soviet
Union and, unlike the Yugoslav officer corps, they have no familiarity
with US weapons systems or procurement procedures
—despite Romania’s current independent stand, a return to a more
pro-Soviet policy cannot be excluded if Ceausescu were to die, or
be removed
—Romania maintains a harsh internal system and has a poor
human rights record, a fact which will provoke opposition in
Congress (S)
We also think that it would be good to sound out our allies, particu-
larly to determine if they have also been approached by the Romanians
on this matter. However, given the delicacy of the matter and the
danger of leaks, we strongly feel that this should be done only within
the Quad framework. Vest is leaving for a Quad meeting on Monday,6
and the issue could be raised at that time. Based on his soundings—
as well as the papers prepared by State and Defense—we could then
proceed to hold an SCC. (S)
We recommend therefore that at the MBB, you
—emphasize the need to proceed cautiously
—weigh in for consulting the allies, but only within the Quad
framework (S)7
5 Larrabee made a similar point in an April 23 memorandum to Brzezinski briefing
him for an upcoming Vance-Brown-Brzezinski lunch. The resignation of Secretary Vance
on April 28 forced the cancelation of the VBB meeting. (Carter Library, National Security
6 June 16. The Quad refers to the formalized meeting of the political directors of
the United States, United Kingdom, France, and East German Foreign Ministries.
7 The Muskie-Brown-Brzezinski meeting took place June 11. In a memorandum to
Denend and Aaron later that day, Brzezinski informed them that the MBB had decided
to “inquire what the Romanians have specifically in mind. No need for prior consultations
with the Allies on this subject.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
229.
Telegram From the Embassy in Romania to the Department
of State1
4940. Budapest for Counselor Ridgway. Department please pass—
upon concurrence of Counselor, who has not seen message and may
wish to comment further—to AmEmbassies Amman, Belgrade, Berlin,
Cairo, Damascus, Kabul, Madrid, Moscow, Prague, Sofia, Tel Aviv,
Warsaw, USMission USNATO. Subject: Counselor Ridgway’s Meeting
With Foreign Minister Andrei.
1. (C-entire text)
2. Summary. Counselor Ridgway’s meeting with Foreign Minister
Andrei reviewed issues in the Middle East, Afghanistan, Iran, European
security and CSCE, East-West relations and general bilateral matters.
Andrei informed Ridgway of the Islamic Conference committee’s desire
to meet with anti-government forces in Afghanistan to work out a cease-
fire with condition that Soviet troops withdraw and that a provisional
government be formed from members of current government and
insurgents. Little substantive change in Romania’s positions was indi-
cated on any issue discussed. Meeting was cordial and candid.2 End
summary.
Minister Stefan Andrei. Accompanying the Counselor were the Ambas-
sador and Special Assistant John King. With the Minister were Con-
stantin Oancea, Deputy Foreign Minister; Nicolae Turturea, Acting
Director, Inter-American Affairs; Mircea Raceanu, OIC, North Ameri-
can Affairs; and Radu Matescu, interpreter.
Confidential; Immediate. Sent Immediate to Budapest. In telegram 4941 from Bucharest,
June 16, the Embassy summarized the remainder of Ridgway’s visit to Romania, and
described the atmosphere of the meetings and receptions. (National Archives, RG 59,
Central Foreign Policy File, D800294–1042)
2 In preparation for the visit to Bucharest, the Embassy submitted in telegram 4506
from Bucharest, June 3, a draft of the “substantive toast” Ridgway was to deliver at a
reception on June 13, marking 100 years of diplomatic relations. The draft contained
language celebrating “continued positive development of our bilateral relationship, to
our common effort to see the spirit of human genius used for the betterment of mankind.”
In reviewing the text, Ridgway highlighted this passage and wrote her Special Assistant,
John King: “John—Check with someone other than [Romanian desk officer] Frank Tum-
minia about this. . . I’d hardly say that an essentially Stalinist society is one to which
we ought to join our efforts to find something ‘common’ for the betterment of mankind.
We somehow keep forgetting what we’re dealing with. R.” (National Archives, RG 59,
Counselor to the Department, Subject Country Files and 1980 Briefing Books, Box 3, Pol
2—Romania)

Romania
4. At a separate introductory meeting earlier in the day, Counselor
Ridgway and Minister Andrei exchanged letters from Presidents Carter
and Ceausescu on the occasion of the centennial of US/Romanian
relations.3 Andrei opened second meeting by expressing satisfaction
with improvement in US/Romanian relations over past 15 years as
indicated by large number of exchange visits by officials of the two
countries and by progress in several fields, especially trade. He also
expressed appreciation for Department’s support for MFN renewal.
5. Bilateral relationship. Ridgway noted growing tradition of
exchange visits and regretted President Carter’s inability to stop in
Bucharest during his forthcoming trip. Schedule permitted only one
stop in Eastern Europe and Romania could appreciate importance of
a visit to Yugoslavia at this time.4 After asking Andrei to convey Presi-
dent Carter’s “high esteem” to President Ceausescu, she said the former
hoped to make a trip to Bucharest in the future to reciprocate Ceauses-
cu’s April 1978 visit to Washington. She also noted that President
Carter’s inability to visit Romania this time in no way should imply a
lessening of the importance the US attached to relations with Romania
or of Ceausescu’s role in European politics. Andrei made careful notes
and said he would directly inform President Ceausescu.
reviewed US position on search for peace under Camp David aegis,
stressing our continuing faith in success of the process. There had been
progress despite difficulty of issues, especially Palestinian autonomy
question. US believes any initiative to alter UN Resolution 242 or to
undermine Camp David process must be opposed. The so-called “Euro-
pean initiative” can be useful if it meets all of our concerns and falls
within the Camp David guidelines. The US is trying to get Israel and
Egypt back to the negotiations on the remaining difficult issues with
minimum delay to limit prospect of counterproductive outside initia-
tives. Andrei said Romania was happy to see Camp David process
accomplish as much as it had, but that it seems to have exhausted
its possibilities since it had not provided for a comprehensive peace
Foreign Ministry had delivered an unofficial draft of Ceausescu’s message to Carter.
memorandum indicating that the Romanians would seek assurances that the special
relationship between the United States and Romania, and between President Carter and
Ceausescu in particular, remained strong, especially in light of Carter’s decision to only
travel to Yugoslavia. (National Archives, RG 59, Counselor to the Department, Subject
5 Muskie delivered the speech, entitled “The Middle East: Outlook for Peace,” at
the Washington Press Club on June 9. The speech was published in Department of State
Bulletin, July 1980.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
involving Israeli withdrawal from all occupied territory and had not
provided a solution for the problem of the Palestinians. Romania
believes an international conference should be called under UN aus-
pices with the US and USSR as co-chairmen and bring together all
parties to the conflict, including the PLO. As envisioned, the conference
would not deal with problems solved by the Camp David process
but only outstanding issues. A comprehensive solution should not be
restricted by the guidelines of UN Resolution 242. Problems in the
region must not be allowed to get out of hand in the wake of the raging
conflict in Lebanon, conservative Islamic resurgence in IGCN and other
disturbing developments. Israel must stop using the PLO excuse to
resist solutions. Andrei said he recognized that the US could not look
for solutions outside the Camp David process at least until after the
elections in November, but did respond in that session to Ridgway’s
question whether Romania contemplated any initiative now that the
May 26th deadline had passed.
7. Afghanistan. Ridgway provided Andrei with current informa-
tion on Afghanistan situation and reviewed US position. She expressed
appreciation for Romania’s stand against Soviet invasion and hoped
Romania would support efforts to find a solution. Andrei then reviewed
deterioration in international relations and increasing world tension
because of continuance of some problems and struggle for domination
of one country over another. He said Romania considers Soviet invasion
of Afghanistan as climax of this entire process. He reiterated Romania’s
position that invasion was not justified on any grounds. “You can’t
make a country happy by military force.” Noting the difference between
Ceausescu’s and Gromyko’s recent statements on Afghanistan, he
emphasized again that Romania remained categorically against the
invasion since military action of any type endangered international
cooperation. This applied to the doctrine of “limited sovereignty” and
intervention by one Socialist country in another. The struggle for inde-
pendence is a major aspect in international affairs and it must be
accommodated. He said a quick solution in Afghanistan must be found
by negotiation of Soviet troop withdrawal together with international
guarantees of non-interference by outside states in Afghanistan. Roma-
nia thus welcomes formation of the special committee by the Islamic
Conference as it could lead to a political solution. Pakistan Foreign
Minister Agha Shahi told him during his visit to Bucharest June 9, that
the committee had already tried to contact Soviets, Babrak government
and the insurgents. In this respect, Shahi emphasized that contacting
Babrak regime did not imply recognition of it. Shahi said the COEE
hopes to arrange a cease-fire between government and anti-government
forces based on condition of withdrawal of Soviet troops from Afghani-
stan. Next step, in committee’s view, would be formation of a provi-

Romania
sional government from members of present government and represent-
atives of the insurgents, allowing Afghans to work out their internal
problems free of outside influence. Andrei commented at this point
that Romania considers it fundamental to get the Soviet Union to
withdraw its troops and to guarantee non-interference in Afghanistan
by all states, including Islamic countries, while internal decisions are
being worked out. This should be done, he added, from the political
base existing before the invasion. In this context, Ridgway noted Dep-
uty Foreign Minister Groza’s statement in Washington that Romania
would not only oppose the importation of revolution, but the importa-
tion of counter-revolution as well.
8. Iran. Ridgway expressed US hopes that Romania could support
efforts to free the hostages, despite its known position that economic
sanctions are not feasible. The US believes sanctions will have a con-
structive effect and open other opportunities for discussion of the hos-
tage issue with Iran. All nations have an interest in freeing the hostages
and creating safer conditions for their diplomats. She added that the
US attempt to rescue the hostages was humanitarian in impetus, not
military. Andrei reiterated Romania’s desire to see the hostages freed
as soon as possible since it would lessen international tensions. He
noted however that economic sanctions could be turned against the
US by hostile forces in Iran.
9. European issues and CSCE. Andrei noted that the greatest danger
to world peace lies in Europe, and that any war there would be nuclear.
Romania wished to strengthen security and reach a balance between
the two sides through reductions in armed forces and military budgets.
The theater nuclear force deployment decision should be delayed and
negotiations started immediately for reduction by both sides of
medium-range weapons. Stressing the need for balance, Andrei said
the negotiating process should seek ultimately to reduce tension and
reestablish detente. This in turn would help the situation in Afghanistan
and give impetus to the withdrawal of Soviet troops. It would also
create conditions for a successful Madrid CSCE review meeting, which
in turn would revitalize the Helsinki spirit and improve the interna-
tional climate. In this respect Romania believed additional bilateral
consultations with the US might be helpful in preparing for the Madrid
meeting. Andrei suggested such consultations in Bucharest in July or
early August, with perhaps yet another consultation after the summer.
Ridgway agreed to take his suggestion back to Washington. On TNF,
Ridgway said NATO intended to go through with its decision, pointing
to the fact that three offers to the Soviets to negotiate arms reductions
had gone unanswered. Since NATO missiles had yet to be produced,
the TNF decision had a built-in delay on deployment which could be
used to negotiate. Ridgway confirmed the American desire to safeguard

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
the CSCE process as the only one that brings all European nations
together. The US would try to shape the Madrid meeting to achieve
that objective and not destroy the process.
10. East-West relations. Describing US-Soviet relations as “poor,”
Ridgway noted that this applied only to the Soviets and that the US
pursues a different policy toward East European countries, particularly
Romania. Andrei expressed appreciation for the wisdom of this policy
but regretted the downward spiral of US-Soviet relations and the deep-
ening of mistrust between the two nations over so many issues (Ethio-
pia, Angola, C[amp] David Agreements, NATO, TNF decision, and
postponement of SALT process). Noting that the East-West framework
was dependent on the world situation, Andrei again argued for the
safeguarding of the CSCE process and the improvement of the interna-
tional climate.
Aggrey
230.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
Romania1
162131. Subject: US-Romanian Military Supply Relationship. Ref:
1. S-entire text.
2. We have given careful consideration to the question of establish-
ing a military supply relationship with Romania. It has been decided
at a high level that we should respond to Admiral Dinu’s request
(reftel) by going back to the Romanians in a low-key way to ask that they
be more specific about their interest in establishing such a relationship.
made a similar request. The most restrictive provisions of the Battle
Act3 are no longer in force, and the US has a growing interest in
Secret; Immediate; Nodis. Sent for information Immediate to the White House. Drafted
by Courtney and Barry; cleared by O’Donohue, Kramer, Larrabee, Schmidt, and in PM
and T; approved by Bartholomew.
3 The Mutual Defense Assistance Control Act, also known as the Battle Act, restricted
export of certain strategic and military items to countries allied with the Soviet Union.

Romania
supporting Romania and its policies of independence. Nevertheless,
Romania’s membership in the Warsaw Pact and probable opposition
in the Congress are serious obstacles.
4. Before deciding on next steps, we would like to have greater
confidence than we now have that Admiral Dinu’s request represented
a serious and continuing Romanian interest in a military supply rela-
tionship. Accordingly, at the Ambassador’s discretion the Defense Atta-
che should make an appointment with Admiral Dinu and convey the
points in para 5.
5. Talking points:
—Careful consideration has been given in Washington to the
approach you made on March 6 concerning the possibility of US mili-
tary sales to Romania.
—As was the case in 1975–76, any such sales to a member of the
Warsaw Pact raise legal and political questions, although some legal
obstacles have since been relaxed.
—We want to approach the matter with a constructive attitude,
although we would not want to raise expectations that could not be
fulfilled.
—Before considering the Romanian request further, we would
appreciate having a firm indication that the Government of Romania
remains actively interested in pursuing the question of US military
sales.
—If it is, we would like to have specific ideas of the kinds of articles
you might wish to purchase. We could not provide such items as major
weapons systems or sensitive military technologies, but we would be
prepared to hear other requests.
If the Romanian interlocutor responds by referring to the list
handed over in 1975, the Defense Attache should answer as follows:
—We will report your interest to Washington.
—You should be aware, however, that the 1975 list contained a
number of items which involve sensitive military technology or major
weapons systems.
6. Begin FYI. Following, for Embassy’s background, is list given
us in 1975:
Portable radar station for tactical reconnaissance;
Grenade thrower—adaptable for man-portable armaments;
Marksman passive device—for aim at the target—for gun, stun
gun and machine gun;
Launching device for portable anti-aircraft missiles and portable
anti-aircraft missiles designed for air defense against low speed and
low level flying attacking aircraft; self-propelled anti-aircraft missile

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
launchers and anti-aircraft missiles for close-in defense against low
flying attacking aircraft;
Portable missiles system and portable missiles designed for use
against tanks and armored personnel carriers;
Light mortar—caliber 120mm.—and the 120mm. shells (explosives,
flash and smoke);
Two barrels aircraft cannon;
Coastal minesweeper—designed in a magnetic structure;
Stereoscopic rangefinder for anti-aircraft artillery;
Technical equipment for medium tank. End FYI.
7. This is a joint State-Defense message.4
Christopher
4 The Embassy reported the July 1 meeting between the Defense Attaché and Dinu
in telegram 5390 from Bucharest, July 2. Dinu explained that Bucharest was still interested
in a military supply relationship on the basis of the 1975 list. Dinu also “enquired how
eventual Romanian-US military sales agreement would be finalized, posing question of
a possible signing of documents at the highest level.” (Carter Library, National Security
Affairs, Staff Material, Freedom of Information/Legal, Arms Transfers/Country File,

Romania
231.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
Bucharest1
202085. Joint State-Defense message. Subject: US Military Exports
to Romania. Ref: Bucharest 5390.2
1. (S-entire text)
2. The meeting on July 1 between the DATT and Rear Admiral
Dinu appears to have been a useful exchange. We believe it important
to have an early second exchange to clarify more precisely what we
have in mind.3 We are particularly concerned that the Romanians not
build unrealistic expectations and that our exchanges reflect a careful
and constructive approach.
3. Our strategy at this stage is to give the Romanians a general
understanding of the kinds of equipment the US might be willing to
license for sale and the kinds the US is not prepared to license, and to
seek Romanian reactions to this approach. Begin FYI. Shortly we will
inform the Yugoslavs, who approached us, that the US would approve
an export license for the export to Yugoslavia of a US aileron drive
system to be installed in the wings of the Romanian version of the Jurom
jet fighter. This should not repeat not be conveyed to the Romanians
at this time. End FYI.
4. Accordingly, at the Charge’s discretion, the Defense Attache
should convey the following points to Admiral Dinu. Begin text:
—We found the exchange which took place on July 1 to be useful.
—In view of the interest in having further exchanges on this subject,
we wish to outline in greater detail to you our general approach.
the White House. Drafted by Courtney, Farber, and Tumminia; cleared by Bartholomew,
Barry, Kreisberg, Siena, and Larrabee and in T; approved by Nimetz.
meeting between Dinu and the Defense Attaché. The Embassy reported: Dinu “expressed
his satisfaction with the meeting and the fact that the U.S. response had not been a
categoric ‘no.’” See footnote 4, Document 230.
3 The decision to approach the Romanians to seek clarification was taken at a July
23 MBB meeting. O’Donohue forwarded Secretary Muskie a briefing memorandum on
the status of the Department’s position on military exports to Romania on July 22
recommending that the Defense Attaché approach the Romanians again seeking clarifica-
tion. Muskie wrote in the margin “Clear cable and after Romanian response talk to
Congress.” (National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Subject Files of

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
—We are pleased that Romania and the United States have devel-
oped, in a gradual and prudent fashion, a military relationship that
includes high-level military visits, ship visits, and other interchanges.
—We are willing to consider making strictly limited exports of US
military equipment to Romania on a case-by-case basis. While we are
not prepared to consider sales of military equipment on a government-
to-government basis (that is, under the US “foreign military sales”
program) we could approve exports of some commercially-available
US-manufactured munitions list items exclusive of major defense
equipment or sensitive military technologies.
—These limitations would mean that most if not all items on the
list provided to us in 1975 would be unavailable. The US might, how-
ever, be prepared to entertain specific license requests for some items
under such headings as, for example, certain radars, communications
equipment, light cargo-personnel vehicles, light aircraft, selected non-
weapons components for the Jurom jet fighter, and other non-sensitive
military equipment. US approval of export licenses would be subject
to COCOM concurrence.
—Exports from the US of weapons or sensitive military technolo-
gies will not be possible for the foreseeable future. No US Government
credits would be available for such exports to Romania.
—Exports to Romania of commercially-available munitions list
items would not involve the conclusion of agreements between Roma-
nia and the United States.
—As a condition of export approval, we would require assurances
from Romania that equipment sold to it not be transferred or otherwise
made available to third parties.
—Our willingness to consider such exports to Romania despite its
membership in the Warsaw Pact reflects the positive trends in US-
Romanian relations and would depend on the continuance of such
trends.
—Before proceeding further on this matter, we would appreciate
receiving your government’s views on the approach we have outlined.
We are particularly concerned that both our governments have similar
perceptions of what is possible and what is not.
—If you inform us that Romania is interested in this approach, we
will then carefully assess all factors and inform you of our final decision.
In the meantime we would be prepared, as indicated in the July 1
meeting, to receive specific requests from Romania.
—If exports are approved, the US would plan no formal announce-
ments, but you should expect eventual public disclosure of Romanian
purchases of US equipment. The administration would also need to
inform appropriate congressional leaders before sales were made.

Romania
—In dealing with diplomatic or congressional queries, we will
take the position that US willingness to consider exports of certain
commercially-available non-sensitive munitions list items to Romania
would not mark a significant new departure in US military export
policy. End text.
5. If the Embassy believes it would be helpful to the Romanians,
the Defense Attache may also convey the following factual information
on the procedures for making purchases of US munitions list items.
Begin text. The US Government does not act as an intermediary for
commercial munitions sales. Romania must deal on its own with US
manufacturing firms. Once the terms of a sale had been worked out
between Romania and the firm concerned, the firms would request US
munitions licenses from the Department of State. Prior to requesting
an export license, a firm may seek an advisory opinion to determine,
before negotiating a sale, whether a munitions license would likely be
approved. If Romania desires names of US firms which produce certain
specific items of equipment, Romania could make inquiries to the
Defense Security Assistance Agency (DSAA) in Washington. Romania
could also consult the Department of State (PM) regarding possible
release of specific munitions list items. End text.
6. In addition to receiving a report of the meeting with Admiral
Dinu, we would also appreciate having your assessment of how future
exchanges with the Romanians on this issue should be handled. Admi-
ral Dinu appears to be a channel trusted by Ceausescu, but if the
Romanians express continued interest we believe it may be essential
to have an exchange in political channels to ensure that there are no
misunderstandings.4
Muskie
29 meeting between Dinu and the Defense Attaché: “While Dinu conveyed the impression
of being personally pleased by the DATT’s response, Dinu sought to place the onus of
further movement on the U.S. with his persistent request for an indication as to which
item the US might favorably consider.” Noting that when the Defense Attaché suggested
that further conversations might take place in political channels Dinu did not respond.
The Embassy recommended that “if the Department still considers it necessary to be
more fully informed of Romanian intentions, we could wait for Dinu to convey the
response of his superiors.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
P870104–0582) Dinu did not follow up on the discussion.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
232.
Paper Prepared in the Bureau of European Affairs,
Department of State1
Washington, December 15, 1980
SUBJECT
Uncertainties in Romania
Over the past several weeks we have seen further indications of a
growing mood of uncertainty in Romania which reflects Ceausescu’s
difficulty in coping with the country’s increasingly difficult economic
and political problems and his concern that developments in Poland
might find an echo in Romania.
There are signs that President Ceausescu is having an increasingly
difficult time managing affairs in Romania. While he has demonstrated
considerable skill in maneuvering Romania through difficult periods
in the past, the current situation—domestic and international—presents
particular problems for him. There are also reports from intelligence
sources indicating that he may be suffering from slightly debilitating
medical problems and/or, increasingly, the meglomania which is an
outgrowth of his own cult of personality. In any event, it seems clear
that Ceausescu’s erratic involvement in mid and low level personnel
matters and economic planning decisions has become even more pro-
nounced. As Soviet political pressures build over Poland, Ceausescu
may also encounter difficulties in managing Romania’s foreign affairs.
Ceausescu’s reaction to the Polish crisis has been a mixture of
predictable toughness and unusual conciliatory gestures. Although
sharply critical of the Polish Party for not maintaining adequate control
over developments, Ceausescu has repeatedly stressed his opposition
to any outside intervention in Poland’s affairs. Addressing his domestic
audience, Ceausescu has stressed the need for Romania’s workers to
stay within the established party and trade union system when dealing
with problems and raising grievances. While exhorting the workers to
redouble their efforts to increase production and meet planned needs,
Ceausescu has made clear that open dissent will not be tolerated, and
worker slow-downs and stoppages since the beginning of the Polish
strikes have been dealt with quickly, though apparently not harshly.
In an unusual effort to suggest an atmosphere of responsiveness to the
and Bradtke, cleared by Bridges and Barry, approved by Holmes. The paper was prepared
as part of the briefing material for Ridgway’s December 16 meeting with Bogdan.

Romania
population’s needs, the Government has on two recent occasions
sought comment from the general public on proposed legislation affect-
ing housing and food distribution. In an analogous move, the official
trade unions have published for comment the issues to be discussed
at the quinquennial trade union conference early next year.
The future of Romania’s economy seems more uncertain than at
any time in the last decade. Ceausescu’s goal of turning Romania into
a developed country by 1985 is now clearly unattainable. Romania no
longer has the raw material and manpower reserves which fueled the
double digit growth rates of the past decade. In particular, Romania’s
oil production is declining, and net oil imports, estimated at $1.2 billion
in 1980, are an increasing drain on the economy.
Nevertheless, Ceausescu continues to emphasize investment and
rapid growth. This policy only exacerbates Romania’s most serious
problem, its growing balance of payments deficit, which was $1.7 billion
in the first six months of 1980, more than the total deficit for all of
1979. Romania’s hard currency debt also jumped by more than $2
billion in the last six months.
Unable and unwilling to introduce real economic reforms, Ceau-
sescu has resorted to shuffling personnel and tinkering with the econ-
omy. The 1981–85 Plan has undergone a series of revisions and has
still not been approved. Measures supposedly aimed at decentralizing
decision-making and creating worker incentives have had little
impact—except to increase confusion and cyncism among workers and
managers. At the same time, we have also seen evidence that the GOR
is being forced to make shifts or cutbacks in some programs to save
hard currency, reduce spending and be somewhat more responsive to
consumer needs. These actions seem designed more to prevent a spread
of the “Polish virus” to Romania than to serve a part of a coherent
approach to Romania’s economic problems.
For the average Romanian, the effects are clear. A journalist-defec-
tor recently observed to us that shortages in the stores are unprece-
dented, even for a communist country. For the first time in Romania’s
2,000 year history, the country is no longer able to supply its population
with one of its major staple food items, Romanian cheese. Our Embassy
reports that given the low quantity of most food and consumer goods
available and inadequate housing, it is safe to say that the standard of
living of the average Romanian is in slow decline. (Romania presently
stands only ahead of Albania in standard of living in Europe.)
The same defector told us that the mood of the Romanian intelligen-
tsia is pessimistic. Those who have any awareness of events outside
Romania see no hope for economic or political improvements in Roma-
nia as long as the Government maintains its over-exaggerated push
for foreign trade and industrialization at the expense of the consumer

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
sector. Consequently, increasing numbers of intellectuals and Govern-
ment officials are considering getting out. This may help account for
the recent rash of Romanian defections.
We have no hard evidence of increased Soviet pressure on Romania
to change its position on Poland, and Romania has refrained from the
kind of polemics manifested by the East Germans and Czechoslovaks.
Pressure on Ceausescu is likely to mount considerably if the Soviets
intend to intervene in Poland. Most curiously, we have seen two sepa-
rate reports of statements Ceausescu allegedly made in private to the
effect that were the situation in Romania as precarious as in Poland,
he would be prepared to invite the Soviets in to stabilize the situation.
We should be more alert than usual when it comes to demonstrating
our support for Romania’s independent position in the Warsaw Pact.
Indications on any front of our support for Romania’s continued inde-
pendent foreign policy course could be particularly important in help-
ing it maintain its precarious political equilibrium in the coming
months. Tangible evidence of U.S. interest in and support for Romania
will be particularly important if the Soviets should intervene militarily
in Poland and the Romanians should decline to participate in or endorse
the intervention.
233.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
Romania1
334596. Madrid for CSCE—Greenwald and Davidson. Subject:
Counselor’s Meeting With Bogdan.
1. C-entire text.
2. Summary. During a tour d’horizon with Counselor December
16, the Director for the Americas in the Romanian Foreign Ministry,
Corneliu Bogdan, stressed Romania’s firm commitment to the continua-
tion of the Helsinki process and urged the U.S. to keep an open mind
about the venue of the follow-on conference. Bogdan believed the
Confidential; Priority. Sent for information Priority to Madrid for the CSCE delegation.
Sent for information to Warsaw, Moscow, and USNATO. Drafted by Becker; cleared by
Bridges, Barry, and in HA; approved by Ridgway.

Romania
Soviets do not want to interfere in Poland2 and observed the situation
there appears to be calming down. The Counselor reviewed the U.S.
position on Poland, and welcomed Romania’s constructive contribution
at Madrid. The Counselor observed that next year’s most favored nation
(MFN) hearings will probably focus more on Romania’s emigration
procedures than on the numbers involved since the current rate of
emigration is relatively satisfactory. Bogdan disclaimed any current
interest in a new Mid-East initiative. Discussion of human rights, the
IBRD loan, and Romania’s domestic situation will be reported sepa-
rately.3 End summary.
3. The Director for the Americas in the Romanian Foreign Ministry,
Ambassador Corneliu Bogdan, accompanied by Romanian Ambassa-
dor to the US, Ionescu, and Embassy Counselor Ranghet called on
the Counselor December 16 to review the international situation and
discuss outstanding bilateral issues. EUR DAS Barry and the Romanian
country officer also participated in the meeting and luncheon which
followed. Conversation focused on Poland and CSCE and on the
Middle East, next year’s MFN’s hearings, human rights, and Romania’s
application for an IBRD loan for a power project. The last item is
reported by septel.
4. Poland. Bogdan reiterated Romania’s well-known opposition
to any form of outside interference in Poland’s internal affairs. He
instructed Aggrey to call on Andrei to discuss the situation in Poland, stressing that a
Soviet intervention in Poland would have wide-ranging consequences on U.S.-Soviet
relations. The Department also instructed Aggrey to ask Andrei for the Romanian view
of the situation in Poland, and assure the Romanian Government of “our own continuing
strong support for Romania’s independence, sovereignty, and territorial integrity.”
from Bucharest, December 4, Aggrey reported that he had delivered the U.S. position
earlier that day, and that Andrei promised to pass the information to Ceausescu and
discuss the Romanian position with the Ambassador as soon as possible. (National
met with Andrei who informed him that he had just returned from the meeting of the
Warsaw Pact countries Party leaders and Foreign Ministers in Moscow. “The general
consensus,” Andrei told Aggrey, “was that Poland’s problems should be solved by the
Polish people. At present, there is no intention of another Warsaw Pact state’s military
forces interfering in the internal affairs of Poland.” However, Aggrey reported, Andrei
warned that “if the situation in Poland reaches a point of unreasonable conflict” between
the government and protestors, “such an eventuality could lead the regime to invite the
Soviet Union to intervene,” something neither the United States nor Romania wanted
Foreign Policy File, P870104–0550)
discussions with Ridgway on the internal situation in Romania. (National Archives, RG
22 and discussed Poland, CSCE, human rights, and bilateral relations. (Telegram 337804
to Bucharest, December 23; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
emphasized that the presentation by Foreign Minister Andrei to the
Ambassador earlier in the previous week was the best statement of
the Romanian position and remained valid. He also observed that the
past several days had been marked by constructive calm; he expected
the Gdansk commemoration would not get out of hand and lead to a
pretext for intervention. He was reassured by DAS Barry’s report that
the Gdansk observances had been orderly and non-provocative. Bog-
dan refused to speculate on the effect of a possible Soviet intervention
and would not be drawn into a detailed discussion of the specifics of
a Romanian reaction in that event. Nor would he volunteer any sugges-
tion how he would like the United States to show its support for
Romania in the aftermath of a Soviet intervention in Poland; but he
stressed the need for close consultations prior to the US taking any
action affecting Romania, including the issuance of a statement of
support for Romania’s independent position.
5. Bogdan refused to comment on Foreign Minister Andrei’s trip
to Moscow prior to the Warsaw Pact summit meeting.4 He claimed
Andrei dealt solely with bilateral issues. He allowed that Romania’s
role in the Warsaw Pact summit had been a moderating one, “as it
always is”, but insisted that Romania had not arranged the meeting
or sought in any way to be a moderator between the Soviet Union and
Poland in the present crisis.
Middle East
6. DAS Barry asked the status of Romania’s “initiative” on the
Middle East to convene an international conference to carry forward
the accomplishments of the Camp David Agreements. Barry noted that
the GOR had decided in late summer to postpone taking any action
until after the US elections, and urged that the GOR still not initiate
any action until the new administration had an opportunity to review
the situation in the Middle East.
7. Bogdan claimed that the Romanian “initiative” had never been
more than an “idea” floated to see if the apparent impasse in the Camp
David process could be broken. At present Romania does not want to
undertake any moves in the Middle East because they could lead to
still more turmoil.
8. The Counselor expressed appreciation for Bogdan’s remarks,
noting that the Iraq/Iran war and the corollary arguments among the
Arab States which had grown out of it could contribute to a possible
breakup of larger political blocs in the area and have a general destabi-
in Moscow on December 2 for four hours to meet with Brezhnev. (National Archives,

Romania
lizing effect. Bogdan agreed and said Romania wished to do what it
could to keep the conflict in the Middle East and between Iraq and
Iran from widening into a broader conflict which could ultimately
involve a US-Soviet confrontation, which Romania always wishes to
avoid.
CSCE
9. Ambassador Bogdan expressed satisfaction with the first session
of the Madrid Conference. He reiterated Romania’s desire for a gener-
ally balanced discussion of all three Baskets. He stressed the importance
Romania places on its proposal to host the next follow-on conference.
Bogdan asked the U.S. to keep an open mind on the invitation and
make no decision until the second session at Madrid is under way.
Bogdan also proposed holding bilateral consultations on CSCE during
the first week of February.
10. The Counselor expressed the US awareness of the importance
Romania attaches to hosting the next follow-on conference. She assured
Bogdan that no decision would be made until after the new administra-
tion has come into office. She took Bogdan’s request for bilateral consul-
tation under advisement.
11. Speaking “unofficially”, Bogdan saw no possibility for agree-
ment on new proposals during the second session at Madrid. He hoped
for agreement on follow-on meetings by expert groups, however.
12. The Counselor raised with Bogdan the question of participation
by observers from non-government organizations (NGO) and private
individuals and groups at a CSCE follow-on meeting were it to be held
in Bucharest. Yugoslavia’s refusal to allow observers from these groups
had led to considerable difficulty in the United States. The NGO’s and
individuals concerned with the CSCE process became highly critical
of the United States engaging in a process (i.e. Helsinki) in which
freedom of expression was severely curtailed. As a further consequence,
the press had been very critical of the Belgrade meeting and popular
support in the US for the entire CSCE process had suffered. The situa-
tion at Madrid, however, was quite different, the Counselor observed.
The Spanish had set aside space for the various groups to caucus and
demonstrate, consequently they have not been frustrated but have
remained in Madrid or returned to their home countries, including the
US, believing the Madrid Conference has provided them a forum to
air their grievances. Our impression has been that the entire CSCE
process has gained support in the US as a result.
13. Bogdan listened carefully & thought for a moment before
responding that there would of course be some difficulties because it
would not be possible for Romania to agree to permit every individual
or group to enter the country in an observer status. On the other hand,
he said, his government had taken this point into consideration before

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
issuing the invitation, and he was sure that satisfactory arrangements
(not specified) could be worked out.
14. Ambassador Bogdan noted that the new alignment in the Senate
would mean extra work during the MFN hearings. He believed, how-
ever, that the Romanian Embassy knew the key Senators and Congress-
men involved and he hoped the hearings would go well. The Counselor
saw the consistently high number of Romanians permitted to emigrate
over the past year as a positive development. She believed, however,
that this year much more attention would be focused on the process
and procedures involved in emigration from Romania. Reports of har-
assment, bureaucratic delays and even physical abuse would be care-
fully reviewed and would play a major role in committee hearings.5
This point was carefully noted by the Romanians.
Muskie
5 In a December 16 briefing memorandum prepared by EUR, Ridgway was asked
to stress that “concerned Americans and Congressional leaders are focusing increasingly
on the process involved and not just on numbers.” On the copy of the memorandum
circulated in the Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs Bureau, Derian underlined
“Americans and Congressional leaders” and wrote in the margin: “Back to the old ways.
Not that USG is concerned but vague refs to ‘Americans’ as in: Oh, please, do this or
that to help us—too bad.” (National Archives, RG 59, Bureau of Human Rights and
Romania–Nov thru Dec 1980)

Romania
234.
Action Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State
for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs (Derian) and
the Acting Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs
(Holmes) to the Deputy Secretary of State (Christopher)1
Washington, December 18, 1980
SUBJECT
World Bank Power Loan to Romania
SUMMARY
There is a disagreement between HA and EUR, EB, and S/P on
how the U.S. Executive Director of the World Bank should vote on the
IBRD’s Fourth Power Project for Romania. HA believes the U.S. should
abstain on human rights grounds or, if we vote in favor, should follow
up this vote with a high-level demarche. EUR, EB, and S/P believe we
should vote in favor, and at some appropriate time address the issue
at a lower level.
ANALYSIS OF ISSUES
In March 1979, you decided to have the U.S. Executive Director
vote in favor of a World Bank loan to Romania which did not meet
basic human needs (BHN). (See Action Memo of March 15, 1979, copy
attached at Tab A.)2 At the same time, you approved a demarche to
the Romanians based on the premise “that our commitment to human
rights extends to MDB matters, that we also have legal requirements
and that additional reports such as the one by Amnesty International
could in the end force us to withold support from MDB loans.” You
decided that we would hold a series of discussions with the GOR on
human rights issues and that we would monitor the practical results
thru Dec 1980. Confidential. Drafted by Bache, Simon, and Bradtke; cleared by Bridges,
and in HA, L/HR, EB, and S/P. Sent through Ridgway. Barry initialed for Holmes.
2 Tab A is an action memorandum to Newsom from Acting Assistant Secretary of
State for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs Mark Schneider, Vest, and Lake dated
issue of U.S. votes at the World Bank in support of Romanian loan applications in
connection with Romanian performance in human rights. (National Archives, RG 59,
raised the question of World Bank loans and suggested a Romanian goodwill gesture
in the area of human rights would be an important consideration. (National Archives,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
of this process carefully, with a view to determining our future position
on MDB loans. We identified the areas of greatest U.S. concern as
“alleged abuse of psychiatry and penal labor to control dissidents,
charges of restrictions placed on the cultural life of the Hungarian
minority, difficulties experienced by some religious groups and the
continuing issue of the so-called Jewish economic criminals.” We also
decided to take into account the extent to which the GOR cooperated
with Amnesty International or other private groups in reviewing the
trends in the human rights situation. In view of the upcoming IBRD
vote on a non-basic human needs loan for Romania, we now need to
review the situation in Romania and decide how to instruct the U.S.
Executive Director to vote on December 23.
PROJECT DESCRIPTION
The loan is for $125 million to the Investment Bank of Romania to
support a three year segment of the Romanian Government’s 1980–85
investment program in electrical energy. It is a heavy infrastructure
project that includes hydroelectric generating plants, heat generating
plants, heat networks, and power transmission lines. The proposed
IBRD loan would finance about 4% of the total cost of the project
segment, and about 22% of the foreign exchange cost. The project is part
of a longer term effort to reduce energy dependence on imported oil.
HA, EUR, EB and S/P all agree that the project does not meet
“basic human needs” (BHN) criteria.
The Human Rights Situation in Romania
Romania pursues a policy of internal orthodoxy on economic and
political issues, with very strict limits on the exercise of civil and politi-
cal rights and economic decision-making. The society operates within
strictures determined by a centralized authoritarian state.
Those who are politically active beyond the limits set by the Gov-
ernment or who publicly proselytize for religious converts are likely
to be harassed or arrested on trumped-up charges. There are no reliable
estimates of the number of political prisoners in Romania. There are
allegations that some, including dissident labor union members, are
confined in psychiatric hospitals.
Freedom of speech, the press, and assembly are sharply limited.
All publications are government controlled. Persons belonging to rec-
ognized religions may attend religious services freely. However, evan-
gelical groups have difficulties with the authorities whenever they seek
to proselytize outside of church buildings or when they oppose laws
which they believe violate their faith.
Romanians can travel freely throughout their country. However,
few Romanians are allowed to travel abroad. Leaving or attempting

Romania
to leave the country without official permission is a crime. The govern-
ment discourages emigration through social, economic and administra-
tive penalties. Nonetheless, the number of recent immigrants from
Romania to the U.S. has increased seven fold in the past five years,
exceeding 2,700 people in FY 1980. The large majority of these cases
involved family reunification.
The Romanian Government is willing to talk about human rights
violations, both bilaterally and within the CSCE context. Romania has
allowed some visits by international bodies to discuss human rights
abuses, including Amnesty International in early 1979, a group of
U.S. religious leaders, and a Congressional study group on the situation
of the Hungarian minority. It has stalled on the visit of the International
Human Rights Law Group. Romania has participated in a Human
Rights Roundtable in Bucharest in February with U.S. officials and
private citizens and is expected to repeat this in Washington in 1981.
HA Position:
Since our 1979 demarche and several follow-up discussions
between senior U.S. and Romanian officials on the human rights situa-
tion, there has been little, if any, improvement in the areas of greatest
U.S. concern. There are still reports of the abuse of psychiatry for
political purposes. Amnesty International’s 1980 Annual Report
describes several cases of psychiatric abuse which took place in 1979.
Political prisoners continue to be subjected to hard labor, and according
to the Amnesty Annual Report, political prisoners are beaten and mis-
treated with the tacit approval of prison authorities. The Hungarian
minority is subject to regular discrimination in the society at large.
This conclusion is supported by the Congressional staff study which
visited Romania this year. In our view, despite legislation to prevent
such discrimination, the government has failed to take effective reme-
dial action. Members of Evangelical groups have been jailed, harassed
or intimidated by the authorities when they sought to proselytize out-
side of church buildings or opposed highly restrictive laws which
curtail religious freedom. Romanian immigration to the U.S. has
increased, but only after each immigrant endures a year or more of
severe social, economic and administrative penalties. Potential dissi-
dents are often removed from Romania in this manner. There has been
progress in the status of so-called Jewish economic criminals—they
have received pardons. Despite an earlier commitment to allow the
visit of a U.S. private legal group (International Human Rights Law
Group) to look into allegations of human rights violations, the Roman-
ian government refused the group entry in 1980.
Amnesty International’s just published Annual Report (1980) docu-
ments continuing serious human rights violations in Romania in partic-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
ular, imprisonment, forced labor, and psychiatric confinement for polit-
ical and religious dissidents, and for those seeking to emigrate or to
form free trade unions.
A vote for the World Bank loan at this time would appear to
be inconsistent with the human rights situation in Romania and our
legislation on the MDBs. A positive vote would also make our previous
demarches appear pro forma, given our laws and the prevailing human
rights situation. Moreover, it would appear to be inconsistent with
our posture at Madrid. At the current session of the Madrid CSCE
conference, the U.S. delegation called attention to human rights abuses
in Eastern Europe, including Romania.
For the foregoing reasons, HA recommends abstention on the IBRD
loan to Romania. However, if because of current political events in
Poland, it is not a propitious time for such a vote, HA would propose
that an affirmative vote on the loan be followed by a high-level
demarche similar to the one made to the Romanian Foreign Minister
in March 1979. The demarche, while recognizing positive Romanian
efforts, would emphasize our continuing expectation that the Romanian
government work to improve the human rights situation for its citizens,
particularly in those areas outlined in our March 1979 decision. The
demarche would be supportive of recent statements by C and EUR to
Romanian MFA American Director Bogdan. It would also express U.S.
willingness to move ahead on planning for a Human Rights Roundtable
as we and the Romanians had agreed earlier this year at the Roundtable
held in Bucharest.
Raising our human rights concerns at the level of the Foreign
Minister would convey the importance with which we view these
concerns. It would reinforce our Counselor’s representations by elevat-
ing to an appropriately high level on the Romanian side our seriousness
of purpose. It would further demonstrate a coordinated effort on the
part of the USG to further its human rights policy. Because the cable
at Tab A has no specificity as to when a demarche will be made, at
what level, or whether the specific areas of greatest U.S. concern will
be raised, it represents a significant departure from our 1979 position.
EUR, EB, S/P Positions:
During the Carter Administration, the United States Government
has voted in favor of every loan for Romania which has come before
the IBRD Board. This includes almost $400 million in loans which do
not fall in the “basic human needs” category. Now is not the time to
change our policy and abstain on such loans for Romania. With the
threat of a Soviet invasion hanging over Poland, we do not want to
signal a lessening of our support for Romania. On the contrary, our
efforts should be directed towards measures which will strengthen

Romania
Romania’s willingness to resist Soviet pressures to participate in or
approve of Soviet actions in Poland.
More broadly, EB also feels that it is important to support projects
which increase the world’s overall energy supply and which can con-
tribute, as this project can, to helping Romania maintain its energy
independence from the Soviet Union.
We recognize that Romania’s human rights record is poor, but we
see no signs that it is worse today than in the past when we voted in
favor of other non-BHN loans for Romania. In fact, there are small
signs of improvement. In the area of emigration, in particular, Roma-
nia’s record has continued to improve. Other positive steps have taken
place precisely in those areas which we identified in 1979 as of greatest
concern. Most notably,
—There have been no cases confirmed by the Embassy of psychiat-
ric abuse within the last three years and a Romanian emigre doctor,
who was the source of many reports of abuses, has withdrawn his
allegations.
—A Congressional staff study delegation, which was invited to
visit Romania to study the Hungarian minority situation, and toured
the Hungarian areas extensively, found there was no evidence of a
government policy of discrimination.
—The so-called Jewish economic criminals were amnestied this
year, and those who requested to emigrate have been granted permis-
sion to do so; and
—Two free trade union activists were released from jail within the
past month.
While one can debate whether these developments constitute rapid
enough progress, one must also keep in mind that repression and
authoritarian government in Romania did not begin in 1945.
We have expressed our human rights concerns to the Romanians
here and in Bucharest, and will continue to do so. Most recently, on
December 16, Counselor Ridgway and Deputy Assistant Secretary
Barry specifically raised our legislative requirements on IBRD loans
with Director of the Americas Bogdan (Tab B).3 Ambassador Aggrey
also made a major demarche in Bucharest in November on six specific

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
cases.4 As part of our continuing human rights dialogue with Romania,
we will follow up with the Romanians to ensure that they do not
interpret a favorable vote in the IBRD as approval of their human rights
practices. However, in view of these recent demarches and the current
situation in Eastern Europe, we do not believe that a positive vote in
the IBRD should be conditioned upon another human rights demarche
at the Foreign Minister level. At a time when the Romanian Foreign
Minister Andrei is providing us with important and sensitive insights
into Soviet intentions regarding Poland, we believe that asking Ambas-
sador Aggrey to step up the human rights dialogue with him would
be a mistake.
Therefore, EUR, EB, and S/P recommend that the U.S. Executive
Director be instructed to vote in favor of the loan for Romania.
L Comments
There are serious human rights violations in Romania. Nonetheless,
it is possible to maintain that Romania is not engaged in a consistent
pattern of gross violations of internationally-recognized human rights.
Such a conclusion would have to rely heavily on the small signs of
improvement, the inconsistency in GOR human rights performance,
and the GOR’s efforts within Romania and within the Soviet bloc to
increase respect for human rights. The credibility of this position
depends in large part on the Department’s assessment of whether
U.S. attempts to persuade Romania to do better and to resist return to
past patterns of violations are having effect.
Recommendation
That you approve:
—Option One, an abstention on the loan. (HA favors)
delivered a démarche on human rights to Bogdan on five human rights cases. (National
Bridges’s visit to Bucharest, the démarche was once again brought to the attention of
Bogdan. In telegram 9189 from Bucharest, November 8, the Embassy reported Bogdan’s
conversation with Aggrey and Bridges. Concerning human rights, Bogdan responded
that the two countries should seek to minimize differences and reach practicable solutions
to individual cases. Stressing that the issues were in no way related, but that “solving
it would help,” Bogdan also commented on the ongoing demonstrations in front of
Romania’s UN Mission in New York and its Embassy in Washington. (National Archives,
RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, [no film number]) Aggrey again asked Bogdan about
a response to the démarche on December 12. In telegram 10166 from Bucharest, December
12, Aggrey reported that Bogdan “revealed, confidentially, one of the problems had
been the hostile demonstrations at the Romanian UN Mission and a view among some
authorities in Bucharest that the protection was not what it might have been.” Bogdan
noted the demonstrations had been moved, “and with that in mind” he promised “to
look into the matter once more” but requested that the U.S. Government “continue to
monitor the demonstrations.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,

Romania
—Option Two, a positive loan vote combined with a demarche in
Bucharest.5 (HA favors as second choice.)6
—Option Three, a positive vote, with no Foreign Minister level
demarche. (EUR, EB, and S/P favor.)
5 Newsom added an asterisk at this point and handwrote at the bottom of the page:
“at the Vice Foreign Minister level. Revise telegram to stress that this was not an easy
choice in view of continuing human rights problems.”
6 Newsom initialed his approval on December 22. The Department informed the
Embassy in telegram 339063 to Bucharest, December 24, that the Department believed
“it is important that we continue to make clear to the GOR at a high level that our
commitment to human rights extends to MBD matters, that we have legal requirements,
and that we remain concerned about the human rights situation.” On a copy of the
cable, Derian underlined the statement and wrote in the margin: “Which we did NOT
meet on this.” (National Archives, RG 59, Bureau of Human Rights and Humanitarian
thru Dec 1980) Aggrey reported his conversation with Deputy Romanian Foreign Minister
Maria Groza in telegram 10536 from Bucharest, December 31. Aggrey wrote: “Groza
said she understood the situation and appreciated my demarche. She believed future
human rights problems affecting our bilateral relations would be considered by the GOR
in the light of the background I had outlined.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
Policy File, D810001–0652)

Yugoslavia
235.
Memorandum From Vice President Mondale to
President Carter1
Washington, May 10, 1977
SUBJECT
Objectives During Visit to Europe for Talks with Vorster and European Leaders
We are in the final preparatory stage for my forthcoming visit in
your behalf to Portugal, Spain, Austria, Yugoslavia and the United
Kingdom.
As currently scheduled, I will depart for Lisbon this Saturday for
meetings with President Eanes and Prime Minister Soares on May 16;
talks with King Juan Carlos and Prime Minister Suarez in Madrid on
May 17; and with Chancellor Kreisky in Vienna on May 18.
The talks with South African Prime Minister Vorster are set for
Vienna on May 19 and 20. I will then travel to Belgrade on the afternoon
of the Yugoslav leadership; then to London on May 22 to debrief
Prime Minister Callaghan and Foreign Secretary Owen on the Vors-
ter meetings.
There are three basic elements to the visit, each of priority impor-
tance to your foreign policy objectives. My purpose will be:
—to demonstrate in Portugal and Spain the United States’ support
for their return to democracy;
—to convey to Prime Minister Vorster your policy toward Southern
Africa including the United States’ views on the role South Africa
must play in current efforts to resolve the Rhodesian and Namibian
problems, and on the approach South Africa must take within its society
if our relations are not to suffer;
—to emphasize to President Tito the importance your Administra-
tion places on Yugoslavia’s independence, political unity and territo-
rial integrity.
I do not plan to become a negotiator on contentious issues in any
of my meetings, but I do anticipate an in-depth discussion with Vorster.
The following paragraphs summarize principal issues I expect to be
top of the memorandum: “Fritz—Read notes. J.C.” Tabs A–E are attached but not printed.

Yugoslavia
raised during the visit, review the approach I plan to take, and request
your guidance.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to Yugoslavia.]
Yugoslavia. I believe the Yugoslavs are looking forward to this visit
because of the early restoration of high-level US-Yugoslav contacts it
will bring. My primary objective in Yugoslavia will be to convince
President Tito and leading members of his government of your support
for Yugoslavia’s independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity.2
I will state that the US respects Yugoslavia’s place in the non-aligned
movement. At the same time, we believe Yugoslavia must respect our
interests in multilateral as well as bilateral relations if our relationship
is to prosper.
By the time of my visit, we hope to have negotiated a satisfactory
solution to the most contentious issue in our bilateral relations—that
of the impasse of an export license for the Westinghouse-supplied
nuclear reactor destined for Yugoslavia. We hope the Yugoslavs will
give us the assurances we require on reprocessing and disposition of
fuel. I will state that we will want to assure dependable supplies of
fuel and equipment while taking necessary steps to avoid nuclear
weapons proliferation, and I will confirm that Yugoslavia will be wel-
come to join the nuclear fuel cycle evaluation effort.3
The Yugoslavs have indicated their belief that we are not forceful
enough in prosecuting Yugoslav emigre terrorists. Prior to my depar-
ture, I will discuss this issue with Attorney General Bell so as to be
able to assure Tito that we are determined to prevent and punish
terrorists; that we are giving high priority to the bombing of Yugo-
slavia’s Embassy last June4 and that we will vigorously prosecute those
then Governor Carter stated that he would not go to war in Yugoslavia even if the Soviet
Union was to invade that country. While his statements did not generate much attention
at the time, he was asked about them during the October 22 Presidential Debate. Carter
defended his assertion, suggesting that he would not go to war unless U.S. security was
directly threatened. The statement became a campaign issue, even eliciting the first
appearance of Ford’s Secretary of State Henry Kissinger on CBS’s “Face the Nation”
program on October 24, where Kissinger compared Carter’s remarks with those of Dean
Acheson’s remarks about South Korea just prior to the North Korean invasion in 1950.
(Don Oberdorfer, “Kissinger Assails Carter on Yugoslavia Statements,” The Washington
3 Carter wrote in the margin below this paragraph: “Let Tito know ours is a multina-
tional concern—we are not singling out Yugoslavia for special stringency.”
Washington Post reported on June 10 that an anonymous caller claimed responsibility
for the attack in the name of the Pan-Epirotic Federation of America and Canada, stressing
however that the bombing was not sanctioned. The organization, the Post reported,
denied any involvement. (Douglas Feaver, “Yugoslavs Protest Embassy Bombing,” The

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
who have committed terrorist activities. In this connection, I will note
with satisfaction that the TWA hijacking case has been successfully
prosecuted.5
Prior to my arrival in Belgrade, Admiral Holloway will have just
concluded a visit to Yugoslavia for talks in the framework of our limited
military cooperation and exchanges with the Yugoslavs.6 While stating
your priority policy of reducing the level of international arms sales,
I will inform the Yugoslavs that we are prepared to continue US-
Yugoslav military exchanges and consultations, and to consider some
of Yugoslavia’s proposals for military equipment purchases.
Of importance, the visit to Belgrade should give me the opportunity
to talk to some of the government’s upcoming leaders, people we can
expect to have increased dealings with in coming years.
I will plan to focus my discussions on international issues on the
Belgrade CSCE meeting, the Middle East, and our African policy. I
believe that if I am candid with Tito about the nature of my talks with
Vorster,7 this may well produce a positive ripple effect in terms of
Yugoslav consultations with other members of the non-aligned move-
ment on our African policy.8 With your agreement I will base the agenda
for my talks with Tito on the issues outlined above.9
I am attaching at Tab A proposed letters for your signature to
President Eanes, King Juan Carlos, Chancellor Kreisky, Prime Minister
Vorster and President Tito. With your approval I will plan to present
the letters during my talks with each of these leaders.10
York to Chicago and diverted it to Paris. The hijackers released the hostages on September
12, after discussions in Paris with U.S. officials. (“TWA Hijackers Allow Hostages to
hijackers were found guilty of air piracy and conspiracy. (“Croat Nationalists Guilty in
6 Admiral James Holloway, Chief of Naval Operations, visited Yugoslavia May 14–
16 for discussions with Yugoslav military leaders. In telegram 4634 from Athens, May
18, Holloway described his visit to Yugoslavia as “warm and cordial,” marked by
consistent expressions by the Yugoslav military leadership of their desire for closer
relations with the United States. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
7 Mondale met with South African Prime Minister Balthazar Johannes “John”
Vorster in Vienna May 19–20 for talks on Rhodesia.
8 Carter wrote in the margin of this paragraph: “OK—I don’t know whether Tito
is a racist—He may be.”
9 Carter approved the recommendation.
10 Carter approved the recommendation.

Yugoslavia
236.
Memorandum of Conversation1
PARTICIPANTS
Yugoslavia
President Josip Broz Tito
Edvard Kardelj, Member, Presidency
Stevan Doronjski, Vice President
Milos Minic, Vice President, Federal Executive Council
Dimce Belovski, Ambassador to the United States
U.S.
Vice President Walter F. Mondale
Assistant Secretary of State George Vest
David Aaron, Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
A. Denis Clift, Assistant to the Vice President for National Security Affairs
President Tito greeted the Vice President; the Vice President gave
him a letter from President Carter;2 Tito read the letter noting the
reference to the Kardelj visit; and Tito said it was a very nice letter
from the President. The Vice President then gave Tito a letter from
Governor Harriman;3 Tito thanked the Vice President and said he
would read that letter later.
V.P.: Governor Harriman has sent you his best wishes. All Ameri-
cans respect you Mr. President, and we respect Yugoslavia’s independ-
ence and territorial integrity. We hope this meeting will mark improved
relations between our countries. We respect your role as a leader of
the non-aligned movement, and we hope that this meeting will be the
start of much improved relations.
Tito: Thank you, Mr. Vice President. I believe your visit is of great
importance to both our countries. I think this is a good opportunity to
exchange views on issues of interest to both sides. I think our relations
are, on the whole, good. There are no conflicts between our two
countries.
White Palace. Clift forwarded the memorandum to Dodson on June 1 for distribution
to Brzezinski and Vance. (Ibid.)
2 In a letter dated May 11, Carter assured Tito of his administration’s commitment
to resolving the outstanding issues surrounding the building of the Krsko Nuclear
Reactor, reaffirmed U.S. support for Yugoslavia’s territorial integrity, and invited Yugo-
slav Presidency member Edvard Kardelj to Washington. (Carter Library, Brzezinski
Material, President’s Correspondence with Foreign Leaders File, Box 21, Yugoslavia:
3 Not found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
Yugoslavia is entirely independent from both blocs. We are a
founding member of the non-aligned movement, and we are deeply
interested in the non-aligned. The movement rests on principles of
importance, principles we think should be applied throughout the
world.
There are hot points in the world, in Africa, for example, that
threaten to turn into something bigger. There is, first of all, the Arab-
Israeli conflict, then Southern Africa—it is a different category with the
problems of South Africa, Rhodesia and Namibia. There are conflicts
between the non-aligned. India and Egypt have bad relations. There
are problems in Ethiopia. I read today of an attack by Rhodesia on
Mozambique.
V.P.: One of the points I want to make clear, Mr. President, is our
respect for the non-aligned movement. We respect your independence
and your foreign policy.
These past two days pressed my country in the forefront of the
issues you have mentioned, I met with Prime Minister Vorster in
Vienna. I made clear that we expect an independent Rhodesia, with
majority rule, with elections by 1978. We want an independent Namibia
under the outlines of Resolution 385, with elections by the people and
withdrawal of South African forces. I said that we reject their policy
in South Africa, and that failure to make progress on all three of these
issues would result in deteriorating relations. In that regard, we directly
objected to incursions by Rhodesia into Mozambique and Zambia.
Under President Carter, the U.S. has a more direct policy, a policy
of clarity and strength on the issues of independence, and we wanted
the South Africans to know clearly our views so that they don’t
miscalculate.
Tito: What was his answer?
V.P.: He didn’t like it. I think that is why I got sick (laughter). He
said he would support independence for Rhodesia in 1978. He also
agreed to meet with the Contact Group on Namibia by the end of the
month. There may be hope there. The thing we are worried about is
the interim arrangement for Namibia.
Within South Africa itself, Prime Minister Vorster gave us the line
about how the Africans are happy, the coloreds are happy, the Indians
are happy. They all played football together. It is a slow story.
Tito: It is very important about the football.
V.P.: Actually it’s soccer, rather, rugby. What we wanted to do,
Mr. President, was to make clear we mean business. If they want to
get along there must be progress. There must be true independence.
In our country in the past, unfortunately, we have not made this an
issue, but we have made it an issue now.

Yugoslavia
On the Middle East, President Carter is trying to set an environment
by having talks leading to a reconvened Geneva Conference. He has
met with the Arab leaders, and this week he will meet with Crown
Prince Fahd. When the Israelis have organized their new government,
he hopes to meet with the new Israeli Prime Minister.4 President Carter
has had good talks with President Sadat, King Hussein, and President
Asad, and I am sure the talks with Fahd will go well.5 But, of course,
the issues are very difficult.
Tito: Unfortunately, I am a pessimist after the Israeli elections. I
am afraid it will be more difficult. The one who has come up in Israel
is the one for war.
Only the U.S. can put a brake on it, no one else. We must insist
on a peaceful solution. We think the Geneva Conference shouldn’t be
convened because of the coming to power of the new leaders in Israel.
This will only lead to a worsening of relations with the Arabs. As the
Israelis are militarily superior, they might try to take advantage of their
military superiority. It would create a difficult situation for the U.S.
President Sadat, who has succeeded thus far in appeasing Israel,
might find himself in a difficult political situation in Egypt if there is
confrontation.
V.P.: You are right.
Tito: Much depends on the Israelis.
V.P.: There is a hope that the parties can get together. We have been
pressing for such a result. President Carter is reluctant to reconvene the
Geneva Conference until we have essential pieces in place; otherwise,
it would fall apart. Secretary Vance will be going back to the Middle
East shortly to discuss the situation with each leader, and the President
will be meeting next week with Fahd. Our theory is that we have to
have action this year if we are going to have positive action at all.
Tito: You are right in saying that it is necessary to put some of the
pieces in place before reconvening the Geneva Conference. On the
other side, what is bad is that we are not witnessing the coming together
of the opposing sides. There is an opposite process; they are going
further apart.
V.P.: President Carter’s impression, based on his talks with the
Arab leaders was that the situation was developing nicely. With the
4 Menachem Begin’s party, the Likud, won the May 17 elections in Israel. Begin
was confirmed as Prime Minister on June 21, 1977.
of Jordan traveled to Washington April 24–27. Carter met with Syrian President Hafez
al-Assad in Geneva May 9.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
Israeli elections, we don’t know. We are aware of Likud’s previous
statements, but we don’t know what position he will take.
Kardelj: The Arabs have been evolving in a positive sense, including
Syria and the Palestinians. But what has happened in Israel might turn
things upside down.
V.P.: President Carter had an excellent meeting with Asad, and I
am sure this will be true with Fahd. Now it will depend on whether
progress is possible with Israel. The President has said there has to be
a Palestinian territory and that the Arabs have to evolve a process for
peace. It is difficult to commence this process considering the ancient
animosity of the Arabs and the Jews.
Tito: For Israel, the essential thing is for the Palestinians and the
other Arabs to declare that they recognize Israel’s right to exist.
V.P.: Correct, that is a part of it. Setting aside the PLO, we believe
the other Arabs would be inclined to do so. We don’t know about the
Kardelj: After they have something in their hands. . . .
V.P.: Those are the rumors we hear. . . .
Minic: We have been told so by the PLO directly.
V.P.: We are hopeful. President Carter hopes to have progress. As
you have observed, it is a hot spot and outside help is needed because
of the animosity.
Tito: There is big hatred in the region. It is unstable. Since 1947
Israel has occupied territories and not complied with UN resolutions.
V.P.: We objected to the most recent Israeli settlements.
Kardelj: We assume the US will tell Israel not to continue to lie.
Tito: In 1967, I told the Arabs, I told Nasser that they had to recog-
nize Israel, that they couldn’t throw Israel into the sea. They didn’t
like it, but they accepted it.
V.P.: We will press them.
Tito: We don’t know how the situation will develop. That is why
I am not optimistic.
V.P.: What do you, Mr. President, think of the situation in Ethiopia
and Somalia?
Tito: Ethiopia sent a delegation to Yugoslavia two years ago after
the revolution. We had talks and advised them to have a federation
with Eritrea. Nothing happened. They came again at a high level.
I told them again that federation was the best possible solution. Suc-
cession would not be acceptable; it would cut Ethiopia off from
the sea.

Yugoslavia
As far as Somalia is concerned, I had a visit from their President.
He said he is ready to have confederation with Ethiopia.
In Djibouti, the situation is dangerous. I sent our Assistant Foreign
Minister with messages urging the parties to reach a peaceful solution.
In terms of the internal situation, fighting is going on. Both sides are
stubborn. We have let the Ethiopians and the Eritreans know that we
do not agree with succession. However, I am not optimistic.
Minic: After the Ethiopian revolution, when the Emperor was over-
thrown,6 Ethiopia applied for assistance. We agreed to provide eco-
nomic and military assistance within the limits of our possibilities. It
is a progressive regime and we thought it important to maintain Ethio-
pia as a non-aligned country. The policy of some Arab countries, sup-
porting the succession of Eritrea, is the wrong policy. The Ethiopian
regime is assuring us that they are determined to remain non-aligned.
We are of the opinion that we have to support Ethiopia because the
government assures they are determined to remain non-aligned. We
are trying to encourage the government to find a federal solution for
Eritrea, not war. We are trying to press the Arab countries to change
their policy and to influence Ethiopia along these same lines. Neither
Ethiopia nor the Arabs are ready to accept such suggestions.
Tito: It is difficult to say what consequences there will be if the
situation continues on its present course. If such a thing were to
develop, we would have to keep the conflict from spreading. We should
all try to contribute.
Kardelj: What is in question is the policy of detente itself. All of
these conflicts inevitably involve the two world blocs. Africa is possibly
a confrontation ground.
V.P.: Mr. Kardelj, our fondest hope is that that will not happen.
We want majority rule in Rhodesia and Namibia. We want progress
in South Africa. Where there is profound social injustice, there is room
for caprice. We want the U.S. and the Soviet Union to stay out of there.
That is the policy we want to pursue; we do not have designs for
hegemony.
Kardelj: But it is possible that this will have to be the result of US-
Soviet negotiations. It is in U.S. interests that non-aligned countries
remain non-aligned.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
V.P.: We have commenced efforts to move forward on detente with
the Soviet Union. The talks in Geneva are going very well. We would
like to see progress on MBFR. We would like to see a broadening
of people-to-people contact. The Russians haven’t included wars of
liberation in their definition of detente. I would hope, incidentally, that
we could get to the subject of the Belgrade meeting before these talks
are over.
Kardelj: It is not a good position to consider wars of national libera-
tion outside the framework of detente.
V.P.: We want to get along with the Russians, but we found they
are not perfect. Mr. President, your interpreter is great. She never takes
a note. I think if we put her in charge we could solve all our problems;
she is always perfect.
Mr. President, would you please give me your views on CSCE?
Tito: If I have a suggestion to give, it is that you don’t introduce
matters that lead to confrontation—one is human rights. It is a question
that is discussed too much. If the debate on human rights were to be
confined to the US and USSR that would be okay, but other countries
are being drawn in.
Yugoslavia is an open country. Millions of our people work outside
of Yugoslavia; there are many tourists. We have a few people in jail;
this is held as a human rights violation. There are just a few people
who work against us. We have our laws and we must apply them. We
don’t want this held against us in Belgrade. We want to go forward,
not backward, after Helsinki. Yugoslavia has signed an agreement with
Italy and we have solved other problems with our neighbors. I know
there are injustices, but what is injustice? We should try to move along
the lines set in Helsinki. I would hope you will convey these views to
President Carter.
V.P.: I will do so, we want to consider all three baskets to the fullest
extent possible and in a non-confrontational manner. We want to keep
the dialogue on a firm track, a non-confrontation track.
Turning to another issue, because of your leadership in the non-
aligned movement, I wanted you to know we will try to get North-
South dialogue going through CIEC7 on a constructive, hopeful basis.
At the London Summit, we pressed for a hopeful dialogue permitting
progress by the poorer countries of the world. We are proposing case-
by-case commodity agreements; a common fund to keep commodities
in a normal market range. We have proposed increasing contributions
to the World Bank. Our hope is that the CIEC Conference in Paris will
provide the basis for a much more constructive discussion.
7 The Conference on International Economic Cooperation, also known as the North-

Yugoslavia
Tito: The question of assistance to the LDCs is important; unfortu-
nately, the progress is slow.
over three years. Mr. President, some of the demands of the poorer
countries we don’t find possible to accept.
Tito: I feel the greatest obstacle is that of the international companies
which contribute to fluctuations in prices—copper and other raw
materials.
V.P.: It is terrible.
Tito: I think a great responsibility lies with the international
companies.
Minic: We have studied the positions taken at London carefully.
Some are positive, but still the positions of the group of 19 and the
group of 8 at Paris are far apart. It is difficult to know whether the
Paris conference will be successful. We shall try to do whatever we
can in order to achieve at least partial results. You know the group of
19 has to be careful so as not to be denounced by the group of 77—
which is actually 110 nations. If the group of 8 comes closer to the
group of 19, success will be achieved in raw materials, investment and
financial matters.
V.P.: On another issue, Mr. President, I am aware of the fact that
we have had an irritating delay with regard to the Krsko reactor. Our
Nuclear Regulatory Commission has now approved the license, and I
hope you will find this a helpful step.
Tito: We are satisfied with this solution. It would have been unpleas-
ant for a small country like Yugoslavia to have invested so much and
not to have it work out.
V.P.: Absolutely. I hope that this will be a symbol of cooperation
between our countries across the whole range of issues.
Tito: As far as bilateral relations are concerned, we had some agree-
ments with Ford and Kissinger, certain agreements on some kinds of
arms. Now military purchases have stopped. I must tell you openly
and frankly that the discussion about the TOW missile did not please
us. There was a great fuss about this, propaganda and the suggestion
that Yugoslavia was being armed by the U.S. We produce 85 percent
of our own arms. We want to avoid a big fuss. We aren’t asking for
sophisticated weapons, but we don’t want obsolete equipment. I would
hope we could avoid misunderstandings.
V.P.: I know Admiral Holloway has just visited and met with your
military leaders.8 We will look into this aspect of our relations.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
237.
Editorial Note
On May 31, 1977, the Central Intelligence Agency confirmed that
U.S.-manufactured M–47 (Patton) tanks were present in Ethiopia. Fur-
ther circumstantial evidence suggested that the tank shipment to Ethio-
pia originated in Yugoslavia. Secretary of State Cyrus Vance reported
the evidence to President Jimmy Carter in an Evening Report dated
June 22. Noting that the tanks had been delivered to Yugoslavia in the
1950s under a Military Assistance Program (MAP) grant, Vance added
that the Export Control Act required congressional notification in cases
of unauthorized transfers of military equipment. “If the intelligence is
confirmed,” Vance reported, “we will approach the Yugoslavs and
make the required report to the Congress in a timely fashion.” Carter
wrote in the margin “Why not simply ask the Yugoslavs?” (Carter
Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
to Carter that the Department of State had authorized U.S. Ambassador
to Yugoslavia Lawrence Eagleburger to broach the subject with the
Yugoslav Government. (Ibid.)
Although the Military Assistance Program with Yugoslavia was
terminated in 1959, the Yugoslavs had agreed not to transfer “to any
other nation, title or possession of any military equipment, materials,
information, or services” acquired from the United States “without the
prior consent of the Government of the United States of America.”
tral Foreign Policy File, D770223–0965) Eagleburger, who arrived in
Belgrade on June 16 and presented his credentials on June 21, requested
permission to deliver a strongly worded démarche suggesting that
Yugoslav actions cast doubt on “stated GOY desire to expand military-
to-military cooperation, and particularly military sales. More funda-
mentally, it raises serious questions about GOY credibility on a range
of existing bilateral undertakings with the USG, as well as future agree-
ments.” (Telegram 4238 from Belgrade, June 23; National Archives, RG
On June 24, Eagleburger informed Yugoslav Foreign Secretary
Milos Minic that the U.S. Government had information that M–47
tanks supplied to Yugoslavia may have been transferred to Ethiopia
in violation of U.S.-Yugoslav agreements. Eagleburger requested that
the Yugoslav Government confirm if U.S. tanks had indeed been trans-
ferred to Ethiopia. (Telegram 4263 from Belgrade, June 24; National
waiting for Minic’s response, the Embassy reported its own analysis
of the reasons for Belgrade’s transfer of weapons to Ethiopia. The most
likely explanation, the Embassy wrote, was that Yugoslav “enthusiasm

Yugoslavia
for a socialist brother got the best of them.” Yugoslav position in the
Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) offered Belgrade the opportunity to
expand “non-Soviet, ‘progressive’ influence” to Ethiopia. Another
probable reason was the low state of relations between the United
States and Yugoslavia prior to Vice President Walter Mondale’s visit
in May. Eagleburger wrote: “Given their obligation to a non-aligned
and socialist state, their irritation with us, and an estimate that they
had little to lose” as military sales from the West were not forthcoming,
Belgrade probably decided to transfer the tanks without regard if the
transfer was discovered. (Telegram 4316 from Belgrade, June 27;
Minic met with Eagleburger on July 8 to confirm that the Yugoslav
Government had, indeed, transferred 70 M–47 tanks to Ethiopia. Minic
suggested that the equipment had been decommissioned by the Yugo-
slav military and was about to be sent to scrap yards when a decision
was made to provide it to Ethiopia. He stressed that the Yugoslav
and U.S. military authorities should establish direct contact to clarify
responsibilities
arising
from the
old agreements.
According
to
Eagleburger, “Minic appealed for USG’s understanding,” expressed
his government’s hope that Washington not allow the incident “to have
a negative impact on all fields, including military cooperation,” and
stressed that Yugoslavia takes very seriously its obligations under inter-
national agreements and has always lived up to them. (Telegram 4603
from Belgrade, July 8; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
File, D770243–0661) On a copy of the cable forwarded to him by Brzezin-
ski, Carter noted “My inclination is not to embarrass the Yugoslavs.”
(Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
Visiting Belgrade in mid-July, Deputy Secretary of State Warren
Christopher told Minic that U.S. law required the administration to
notify Congress of the equipment diversion matter. However, Christo-
pher informed the Yugoslav Foreign Minister, the administration had
decided to do so in a classified letter so as to minimize the chances of
the instance leaking to the press: “We attempting to handle problem
with restraint, not because we do not consider it a very serious matter—
as we do—but because we set great store by our relationship.” (Tele-
Central Foreign Policy File, D770260–0639) Christopher informed
Chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee Frank Church
(Democrat-Idaho) and Speaker of the House Thomas O’Neill (Demo-
crat-Massachusetts) of the Yugoslav diversion on August 6. (Telegram
Foreign Policy File, D770282–0535)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
238.
Memorandum From Gregory F. Treverton of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, August 4, 1977
SUBJECT
Summary of Your Meeting with Yugoslav Ambassador Belovski, August 3, 1977
For your information, the following is a summary of the main
points made in the meeting:
Tito’s Trip
Belovski said that Tito would be gone for nearly a month; he was
uncertain whether the Soviet Union portion was an official visit or a
vacation. In any case, he said it was important for the Yugoslavs to
“normalize” their relations with Moscow. In the last year the Soviet
approach has included many “old” aspects—talk of “brotherhood,”
invitations to bloc meetings despite clear Yugoslav indications that it
will not participate, military approaches—and a persistent tendency
to retain Yugoslavia as a member of the “family.” You agreed that
Yugoslavia was doing just what a country that wanted to retain its
independence and territorial integrity should do.
Korea
In response to your question why Tito was going to North Korea,
the Ambassador said: (1) the Yugoslavs had been frankly impressed
by the sincerity of the North Korean desire for peace on the peninsula
(an argument he repeated); and (2) North Korea had opted for non-
alignment, which was important to Yugoslavia not because of the U.S.
but because of the Soviet Union and the PRC. When you asked why
Belgrade did not recognize Seoul, the Ambassador evaded, with vague
talk of their original cease-fire proposal and their desire to see the UN
force withdrawn.
You indicated that there had been no change in our plans for
withdrawal from Korea. You indicated that we would be prepared to
open communications with the North, provided the South Koreans
were involved. There are two Koreas and the North must recognize
Office File, Country Chron File, Box 56, Yugoslavia: 1977. Secret. Sent for information.
Brzezinski sent a copy of the memorandum to Vance on August 15 and underscored
his hope that Tito would “get some of these points across to Brezhnev.” (Carter Library,
National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Subject Chron File,

Yugoslavia
that; the way to proceed would be to get both admitted to the UN and
begin to involve them in an international framework which might lead
to peace on the peninsula.
U.S.-Soviet Relations
You referred to the Charleston speech on U.S.-Soviet relations2
reiterating that those relations cover a wide front, comprising many
different negotiations in different phases. That is normal for countries
that are in many respects rivals but which recognize their global respon-
sibility to cooperate. You described the relations as “steady, stable and
evolving,” with SALT the only substantial disagreement. You agreed
with the Ambassador that a breakthrough in one set of negotiations—
for instance, CTB—might help across the board, but you also suggested
that the effect should not be exaggerated. Differences on other issues are
real, not atmospherics or a reflection of our approach to human rights.
You suggested to the Ambassador that it is important that the
Soviets understand that we want cooperation on a broad front. We do
not see separate issues as linked. At the same time, to create a false
sense of agreement would be to court the danger of backlash. We are
committed to, and speak about, detente, but it cannot be a selective
detente.
The Ambassador believed this Administration was more genuine
in its commitment to detente than its predecessor, but he wondered
how it could escape the current impasse. You said there was no reason
to be impatient. We want to move but will not make unilateral conces-
sions, and you suggested that Tito might convey that message to the
Soviets.
You indicated that Congressional and public opinion is solidly
behind the President and that, if anything, stagnation in U.S.-Soviet
relations works to the advantage of those who oppose detente. There
is no rush to move forward; quite the contrary, delay may make it
harder to do so; a SALT agreement along the lines we proposed four
months ago would have passed the Senate easily then, now it will
not be so simple. The more impediments the Soviets throw in the
relationship, the more anti-SALT sentiment grows in the United States.
More generally, the Soviets have been unwise in their SALT strategy;
in January 1976 they could have had an agreement they would now
regard as good, but not now.
We want a SALT agreement that is real and sustaining. If there is
no agreement by October, we will see how the parties behave once the
2 For the text of the President’s speech at the 31st Annual Meeting of the Southern
Legislative Conference on July 21, in Charleston, South Carolina, see Public Papers: Carter,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
interim accord lapses. If the Soviets take actions that are inconsistent
with that accord, the mood in Congress will press the U.S. to respond.
The situation could be reminiscent of the early 1960s, and the result
might be again to widen the gap between U.S. and Soviet nuclear
capabilities, since the U.S. stands on the verge of a new era of weaponry.
Once we plunge into that weaponry it might again take years for a
new balance to emerge. We want a SALT agreement that is a wedge
for better relations, both political and military. We will not be silent
about what we stand for, just as we do not expect the Soviets to abandon
their ideology.
Bilateral Relations
The Ambassador said Tito believes that the President is an honest
man and that the Mondale visit had laid a very “clean” platform for
relations. Tito would convey both impressions to the Soviet Union. In
response to your mention of the tank transfer,3 the Ambassador called
it an “administrative failure” which his government wanted to correct.
Yugoslavia would stand by its commitments; it wants to build a sub-
stantive basis for closer cooperation, including in the military field.
You indicated your agreement and hoped that the Presidents could
meet soon.
China
You responded briefly to the Ambassador’s question by indicating
that we are serious about normalizing relations, building on the Shang-
hai communique. At the same time there are historical and psychologi-
cal legacies—and domestic factors—that both sides must take into
account. The Shanghai communique does that on our part; the Chinese
must do likewise.
The Ambassador asked if you would come to Yugoslavia. You
responded affirmatively, saying that you were thinking about a trip
to Europe in the fall and that it might include Yugoslavia.
3 See Document 237.

Yugoslavia
239.
Letter From President Carter to Yugoslav President Tito1
Washington, August 5, 1977
Dear Mr. President:
Vice President Mondale has told me about the warmth of your
hospitality during his recent trip to Yugoslavia, and has given me a
full report on his talks with you. Your insights are very helpful to me.
I understand that you will soon be travelling to Moscow, Pyong-
yang, and Peking—a trip which will be of great importance to everyone
who seeks greater international understanding. I would welcome hear-
ing from you after your trip, to gain your own assessment of the
situation in the three countries you are visiting, and to learn of their
leaders’ views on world problems.
This is a particularly important time in U.S.-Soviet relations.
Despite the tenor of much public commentary in recent months, I am
encouraged by the progress we have made in bilateral discussions with
Soviet officials in a number of areas, including the limiting of military
forces in the Indian Ocean and the ending of nuclear testing. I am
committed to building on what has been done so far, in order to reduce
the risks of war, place firm limits on the nuclear arms race, and create
an enduring basis for U.S.-Soviet relations. I hope you will assure Soviet
leaders of my commitment. We are prepared to move forward with
the Soviet Union on a broad front, on the basis of mutual interest,
reciprocal action, and a common commitment to strengthening peace.
Clearly, gaining a new SALT agreement is of great importance.
Many difficulties remain; but I am prepared to work closely with Soviet
leaders to reach an agreement that will truly provide greater security
in the years ahead. The forthcoming conference to review the Helsinki
agreement, which you are hosting this fall, is also of major importance.
We want to make this a constructive meeting, in order to strengthen
the basis for security and cooperation in Europe.
Correspondence with Foreign Leaders File, Box 21, Yugoslavia: President Josip Broz Tito,
of State and sent to the White House by Tarnoff on July 29. Treverton and Hunter
reworked the draft at Brzezinski’s request. (Ibid.) Brzezinski forwarded the letter for
signature to the President on August 5, noting that he and Vance thought a letter to
Tito “in advance of his trip to Moscow, Pyongyang, and Peking” would be “useful.” (Ibid.)
The letter was transmitted to Belgrade in telegram 184567, August 6, with instructions
to deliver it to Tito. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770282–

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
With regard to China, we are committed to moving forward on
the basis of the Shanghai Communique. Secretary Vance will be in
Peking shortly before you arrive, and will be exploring ways in which
normalization of relations can proceed. I consider our approach to
China to be central to our global policy. Both the United States and
the People’s Republic share parallel interests: namely, to prevent third
countries from establishing positions of dominance where we both
have legitimate concerns. At the same time, our desire to improve
relations with China is not intended to increase problems and difficul-
ties for any other nation. Rather, I believe that normalization will
enhance the prospects for an enduring peace and security in Asia and
elsewhere, and will encourage Chinese participation in international
arenas in a useful and constructive way.
I am particularly concerned with stability in Northeast Asia, and
with the peaceful resolution of problems which divide South and North
Korea. We have decided to carry out a phased withdrawal of American
ground combat forces from the Republic of Korea in a manner which
will not endanger stability on the peninsula. We remain firmly commit-
ted to the security of the Republic of Korea and we are taking steps
to ensure that no one mistakenly believes there has been any reduction
in our resolution to uphold that commitment. At the same time, we
seek ways to lessen tension and establish a framework for a durable
peace on the Korean Peninsula. To that end, we are prepared to meet
with all of the parties most immediately concerned to explore how
best to resolve outstanding issues. Such a meeting would, of course,
have to include the governments of both North and South Korea.
I look forward to hearing from you, and know that I would benefit
from your observations on these and other critical issues. I would also
be deeply pleased if you could visit me in the United States early in
1978. This would give me a chance to meet and talk with you about
world problems, and about ways we can continue to promote the close
relations which exist between our two countries.
Sincerely,
Jimmy Carter

Yugoslavia
240.
Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the
Department of State (Tarnoff) to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, August 31, 1977
SUBJECT
Military Sales to Yugoslavia
As requested in NSC memorandum 5468 of August 23,2 the State
Department has reviewed the interagency study on this subject.3 Pro-
vided that the outcome of the September mission to Belgrade4 is satisfac-
tory and that we receive necessary assurances concerning unauthorized
retransfers of US-origin equipment, the State Department recommends
that a refined version of Option III (Expand the relationship moderately,
with an emphasis on political impact) set the general direction of future
US policy.
Office File, Country Chron File, Box 56, Yugoslavia: 1977. Secret; Sensitive
2 On August 23, the White House tasked the Department of State, the Department
of Defense, the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and
the Central Intelligence Agency to review an interagency study on U.S. options for arms
transfers to Yugoslavia. The memorandum requested that substantive comments on
“major problems or necessary additions” as well as a clear indication of which option
the agencies favor be forwarded to the White House by August 31. (Ibid.) On August
30, ACDA notified the White House that it supported either option II or III of the
interagency study. On September 1, the CIA responded that it had no substantive com-
ments on the paper. In telegram 5865 from Belgrade, August 30, the Embassy reported
its own strong support for option III. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
3 Following Admiral Holloway and Vice President Mondale’s visits to Yugoslavia,
Brzezinski requested a interagency memorandum to review U.S. options on military
sales to Yugoslavia based on Yugoslav requests. The full study, forwarded by the Depart-
ment of State to the White House on August 19, discussed four possible alternatives:
Moderately with emphasis on political impact; and 4. Expand the Relationship Substan-
tially, with emphasis on force modernization and improvement.” The study concluded
an unmistakably favorable indication to the Yugoslavs about U.S. intentions.” While
option 4 “is most consistent with the U.S. strategic interest in maintaining Yugoslavia’s
ability to protect its independence,” it “could add stress to U.S.-Soviet relations” and
“would tend to commit us to supporting the Yugoslavs in the event of conflict.” (Carter
Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Country
Chron File, Box 56, Yugoslavia: 1977)
the uses and disposition of MAP military equipment previously provided to Yugoslavia.
The Embassy reported in telegram 6256 from Belgrade, September 17, that “our objectives
and concerns have been met.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
We should signal to the Yugoslavs our interest in improving and
modestly expanding the current arms transfer relationship. Any such
forthcoming message, however, should (a) not raise false Yugoslav
expectations, especially with regard to the level of technology we will
transfer; (b) not impose a significant political cost on the US if the
Yugoslavs are unresponsive; and (c) not put the US in the position of
pressing arms on an uninterested recipient.
Accordingly, the Yugoslavs should be informed in substance that:
—we want to contribute to the security of an independent and
non-aligned Yugoslavia;
—the maintenance and improvement of the arms transfer relation-
ship, in our view, would contribute to that objective;
—nevertheless, both sides must recognize that there are limits on
the amount and kinds of arms which can be transferred. These con-
straints include:
—a shared reluctance to undertake USG financing;
—limits on the level of technology which can be transferred;
—shared interest in not jeopardizing broader political relations
(i.e., US-Soviet and Yugoslav-Soviet relations);
—need to assure that the systems are defensive and could not
threaten our security nor that of our friends and allies.
These constraints, which would include a ban on the transfer of offen-
sive air and naval systems, will limit the arms transfer relationship
with Yugoslavia. They are consistent with the PD–13 guidelines.5
Limited procedural improvements also should be proposed. For
example, we could designate Ambassador Eagleburger as the focal
point for US action on arms transfer requests and invite the Yugoslavs
to name a counterpart in Belgrade. If the Yugoslavs demonstrate a
strong preference for having such exchanges in Washington, similar
arrangements could be made between the State Department and their
embassy. A formal consultative mechanism, however, should not be
offered.
Since our purposes are primarily political, the State Department
should have the lead in determining the timing of this initiative, as
well as that of responses to specific Yugoslav arms requests.
The State Department also recommends that it be asked to conduct
an interagency study to develop specific guidelines to facilitate our
responses to subsequent Yugoslav requests.
Peter Tarnoff
sale and transfers of conventional weapons to cases that are deemed clearly in the
national interest of the United States.

Yugoslavia
241.
Memorandum From the Deputy Secretary of Defense
(Duncan) to the President’s Assistant for National Security
Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, September 14, 1977
SUBJECT
Military Sales to Yugoslavia (U)
(S) I have reviewed, as have Secretary Brown and General Brown,
the interagency study of US Arms Transfers to Yugoslavia.2 We have
concluded that a policy of moderate expansion of US arms sales to
Yugoslavia, generally as described by Option III of the study, best
satisfies US and Yugoslav interests. A policy based on Option II would
serve these interests less satisfactorily. The choice of either Option I or
Option IV, as stated in the study, currently is not warranted.
(S) US interests in Yugoslavia are centered on preserving its inde-
pendence and territorial integrity and fostering its professed role as a
nonaligned nation. The possibility of Tito’s death in the near future
makes the risks to US interests more imminent. An expanded US-
Yugoslav arms sales relationship will assure the Yugoslavs of US sup-
port and enhance the position of those Yugoslavs who wish to look to
the West for support against Soviet pressures. US sales diminish to
some degree the heavy Yugoslav dependence on the Soviet Union for
military equipment, and they develop a framework which would be
the basis for greatly expanded support should we choose to respond
to a Yugoslav request for major assistance.
(S) In addition to the factors noted in the study we must assure
ourselves that the Yugoslavs will not make unauthorized transfers of
US equipment and that Yugoslavia will assume a truly nonaligned
role. The manner in which our policy is carried out should make clear
its connections with these factors.
(S) Implementation of an increased military sales program should
give proper consideration not only to the expansion of the relationship
but also to the constraints which exist. Specific US transfer actions
would of course require evaluation on a case-by-case basis in considera-
tion of the guidelines of PD–13, the security and proper use of US
equipment, and US force requirements. In general, materiel should
come from excess stocks or from production, utilizing existing lead-
Office File, Country Chron File, Box 56, Yugoslavia: 1977. Secret.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
times so as not to interfere with US force requirements. Yugoslav
limitations are also significant. Although we do not understand fully
their failure to purchase many items which have been offered, it is
clear that they have severe budgetary and political constraints and a
measure of unsureness as to their needs and how best to meet them.
These factors are likely to persist regardless of changes in US policy,
and they will play significant roles in governing the rate and direction
of expansion of sales. We must not outdistance the Yugoslavs in our
efforts to expand the relationship.
(S) A US policy based on Option III is appropriate for Yugoslavia’s
present domestic and international political situation. It is also the
policy likely to best serve US interests in post-Tito Yugoslavia. This
policy can be carried out in ways which avoid excessive Soviet reac-
tions. Yet it also increases the credibility of Yugoslav deterrence. This
can be accomplished by demonstrating US and general international
interest in Yugoslav independence and by providing a measure of
increased military capability, both of which will heighten Soviet reluc-
tance to risk an embarrassing, prolonged and costly military interven-
tion in Yugoslavia.
CW Duncan Jr
242.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs(Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, September 20, 1977
SUBJECT
U.S. Arms Transfers to Yugoslavia
In conversations with both the Vice President and CNO Holloway,
Yugoslav officials indicated their interest in expanding their arms pur-
chases from the United States. (U.S. sales totaled $689.5 million in the
Office File, Country Chron File, Box 56, Yugoslavia: 1977. Secret; Sensitive. Sent for
action. Treverton forwarded this memorandum to Brzezinski on September 17 noting
that it had been delayed partly to await the outcome of the mission to Yugoslavia to
discuss the M–47 tank re-transfer and “partly because Defense liked the study so much
it nearly expired winding its way ever upward in the Pentagon.” (Ibid.)

Yugoslavia
1960s.) Specifically, the Yugoslavs expressed interest in the MK–44
torpedo and raised again the question of the Harpoon missile which
we had previously declined to sell.
At my request, an interagency study addressed the general issue
of our military sales relationship with Yugoslavia (Tab A).2 There is
consensus that the relationship should be expanded moderately, with emphasis
on political impact (agency comments are at Tab B).3 I believe that course
of action will serve our basic objectives: (1) underscoring both to the
Yugoslavs and to the Soviets our interest in an independent Yugoslavia;
(2) marginally reducing Yugoslavia’s dependence on the Soviets for
weaponry, thus enlarging its room for maneuver; and (3) building
a relationship with the military, certain to be a key shaper of post-
Tito events.
The Yugoslav transfer of old U.S. M-47 tanks to Ethiopia this summer
stands as a caution. Belgrade’s explanation of it as an administrative
mistake is disingenuous, but I believe the risk of such a re-transfer in the
future can be minimized. Our team just returned from Belgrade where
it reiterated the non-transfer provisions that apply to U.S.-supplied
equipment, reviewed Yugoslav inventories and received fresh assur-
ances from the Yugoslavs that re-transfer would not recur.
We can expect, and must demand, that Belgrade live up to its non-
transfer commitments. At the same time, however, if we modestly expand
our arms sales, the objectives in doing so are long-term. To have value, the
military relationship must be sustained even though the Yugoslavs will
continue to take actions we dislike—actions in Third World groupings,
permission for Soviet military passage through Yugoslavia. In the past,
the sales relationship has been turned off and on with each Yugoslav
action that Washington disliked or approved. The result has been to
confuse the Yugoslavs and drain any benefit from the existing military
relationship.
RECOMMENDATION:
That you approve a moderate expansion in the U.S. arms transfer
relationship with Yugoslavia.4
Substantively, that would imply:
2 At Tab A, attached but not printed, is the interagency memorandum on military
sales to Yugoslavia. See footnote 3, Document 240.
3 At Tab B are the comments from the Department of State, the Department of
Defense, ACDA, and the CIA. See Documents 240 and 241.
4 Carter wrote “OK JC” at the top of the memorandum indicating his approval.
Brzezinski notified the Department of State, the Department of Defense, ACDA, the JCS,
and the CIA of the President’s decision on September 22. (Carter Library, National
Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Country Chron File, Box 56,
Yugoslavia: 1977)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
—informing the Yugoslavs of your decision but also making clear
its limits. You could mention the decision to Kardelj when he visits on
September 30, and Harold Brown could reinforce it when he goes to
Yugoslavia at about the same time.5
—first candidates for sales would be ship defense systems identi-
fied by the U.S. Navy (not including Harpoon). The TOW missile,
previously offered to them, might be re-offered.
—no credit is sought, or would be granted, so only the normal
procedures for notifying Congress would be involved. No offensive
systems would be transferred, and the relationship would be consistent with
PD–13. Of course, increases in sales to Yugoslavia would add to global
U.S. totals, but the Yugoslav total will be modest even in an expanded
relationship.
Procedurally:
—State would chair an interagency group to develop procedures
for responding to Yugoslav requests. That group would include
Defense and intelligence representatives to make sure that transfers
did not entail risks of technology leaks.
—Ambassador Eagleburger might be designated the focal point for
helping the Yugoslavs better understand U.S. arms transfer procedures.

Yugoslavia
243.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, September 29, 1977
SUBJECT
Your Meeting with Yugoslav Presidency Member Edvard Kardelj, September 30,
The memorandum from Warren Christopher2 (in the accompany-
ing briefing book) effectively presents the issues for this meeting.
The most critical question for Kardelj (addressed as Mr. KarDELL)
is continuing uncertainty about our commitment to Yugoslavia’s inde-
pendence and integrity. While efforts throughout the year have erased
most of the deep concern over your comments in the final television
debate3 —though it came up again on Tito’s China visit—reasserting
our concern and commitment is very important. Our new offer of an
arms supply relationship will help considerably.4 You will be breaking
the news to him (points summarized in the State memo). We are also
resuming the processing of FMS cases and requests for export licenses.
Yugoslav concern is heightened by the role the Russians are play-
ing. When Brezhnev came to Belgrade last year, he tried to bully Tito
into moving closer to the Soviet orbit. Tito stoutly resisted, and circu-
lated the memoranda of conversation to key party leaders to make the
point. On Tito’s trip to Moscow, however, Brezhnev tried the opposite
approach: surrounding him with warmth and affection. Yugoslavs who
are intensely suspicious of the Soviet Union believe this is designed
to be used as a weapon following Tito’s death: that the Tito “line” was
friendship for Moscow, and his successors should be bound by it. In
and Memos. Secret. Sent for action. Carter initialed the memorandum indicating he had
seen it. Later in the day, Brzezinski sent another memorandum to Carter forwarding
Department of State talking points on détente and the Oversees Private Investment
Cooperation program with Yugoslavia. Carter initialed Brzezinski’s covering memo-
randum indicating he had seen it and wrote at the top “We may follow up on N/S
Korea.” (Ibid.)
2 Memorandum from Acting Secretary of State Christopher to the President, Septem-
ber 27. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, VIP Visit File, Box
4 The phrase “arms supply relationship will help considerably” is underlined by
an unknown hand, possibly Brzezinski. The Department of State talking points submitted
by Christopher recommended that Carter inform Kardelj of the U.S. Government’s
decision to expand the arms sales program moderately. See footnote 2 above.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
fact, [less than 1 line not declassified] indicates that Tito stonewalled
Brezhnev on the latter’s requests for port facilities, overflight rights,
and landing rights.
While, if time permits, it would be valuable to discuss broader
aspects of international relations with Kardelj, he will be most interested
in the bilateral aspects of our relations, in order to pin down U.S.
concerns.
Of special significance for him also will be Yugoslavia’s leadership
of the non-aligned movement. There is also their proposal and support
for next year’s UN Disarmament Conference. And Yugoslavia is proud
(and a bit uneasy) to be hosting the CSCE review conference, opening
on October 4. (FYI: on the basis of Yugoslav heavy-handedness in
dealing with representatives of Non-Governmental Organizations at
the June preparatory conference, we have urged them to seek advice
from the Finns and Swiss—who hosted CSCE in the first round. Other-
wise, we fear ugly incidents. This matter will be raised with Kardelj
in other meetings.)
Kardelj has a long (6 or 7 page) letter for you from Tito, covering
his trip to Moscow, Peking, and Pyongyang, as you had suggested in
your letter to him.5 Kardelj will reportedly say that Tito would like to
come here in January or February.
The Yugoslavs are also concerned about the record of violence by
emigre groups against their missions in this country, and have repeat-
edly accused us of not taking appropriate action. (Except for the TWA
hijacking, no case has been solved, and at times the FBI has been
uncooperative.) If this comes up in other meetings, Kardelj will be
given strong assurances about our concern and commitment.
Kardelj’s latest book, Trends in the Development of the Political System
of Self-Management Democracy, has just been published. State summa-
rizes it as follows:
was attached at Tab B of Brzezinski’s second memorandum to Carter on September 29.
(See footnote 1 above.) Tito informed Carter that in his discussions with Brezhnev, the
Soviet leader stressed Soviet interest in disarmament and the SALT II negotiation process.
Describing his meetings in Pyongyang, Tito recounted Kim Il Sung’s proposal that a
peace treaty be negotiated between the People’s Democratic Republic of Korea and the
United States or that tripartite negotiations among the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, the Republic of Korea, and the United States begin, but only after South Korean
President Park Chung Hee was removed from power. Regarding Sino-Soviet relations,
Tito described his impression following visits to Moscow and Beijing that neither country
was prepared to make any concession which would alleviate the tensions and that the
relationship was bound to continue on its present course. On October 6, Carter signed
a letter to Tito thanking him for his insights and inviting him to Washington in 1978.
(Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File,
Country Chron File, Box 56, Yugoslavia: 1977)

Yugoslavia
While not destined to be an international best seller (the Yugoslavs
have announced their intention to publish it in “world languages”) or
anywhere as controversial as Santiago Carrillo’s recent work,6 Kardelj’s
“study” is noteworthy for a number of reasons. It is an extension of a
major speech he made June 13th to the 30th Session of the Presidium
of the League of Communists of Yugoslavia (LCY), in which he coined
the term “self-managing pluralism” to define the Yugoslav system.
The speech and the resultant book were endorsed by the Presidium
“as the basis for the activity of the LCY in preparation for the 11th
Party Congress,” which is scheduled for spring of 1978. The study
presents a sort of master plan for the future development of the Yugo-
slav political system as it approaches the level of democracy that they
feel the economic system has already achieved. Kardelj’s “study” does
not provide for a Tito-like role and thus his approach can be seen as
an attempt to provide a stable and mature system that will not be
shaken by the passing of Tito. However, although the upcoming Party
Congress is widely regarded as being the main event which will estab-
lish, at least, the immediate succession to Tito, the official problem to
be solved by the Congress and the main problem addressed by Kardelj
is the achievement of a higher degree of political democracy.
Kardelj is typically philosophic in his comments and does not
attempt to define the exact form of a future, trying “to indicate only
some points of departure for determining our practical tasks concerning
the harmonization of the political system with the system of production
and social-economic relationships, and the further development of self-
management-democratic forms.” He does address a number of topics
of interest, i.e. human rights, Eurocommunism, and other political
systems, both East and West, finding them all wanting in comparison
to “self-managing pluralism.” There are not, however, the racy critical
references to the Chinese or Soviet systems rumored to be present in
early drafts of the book.
I have included a copy of President Tito’s speech this Tuesday in
the briefing book.7
6 Santiago Carillo, Secretary General of the Spanish Communist Party, together
with French Communist leader Georges Marchais and Italian Communist leader Enrico
Berlinguer, launched the Eurocommunist movement on March 2, 1977, at a meeting in
Madrid. His book, Eurocommunism and the State, was published in 1977 and repudiated
Marxist-Leninist revolutionary dogma in favor of participation by Communist parties
in the democratic electoral process.
7 An English translation of Tito’s September 27 speech to the Central Committee
of the League of Communists of Croatia, is in the Carter Library, National Security
Affairs, Brzezinski Material, VIP Visit File, Box 15, Yugoslavia: Presidency Member

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
244.
Memorandum of Conversation1
SUBJECT
Summary of the President’s Meeting with Edvard Kardelj, Member of the
Presidency of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
PARTICIPANTS
The President
The Vice President
Warren Christopher, Acting Secretary of State
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
Lawrence Eagleburger, US Ambassador to Yugoslavia
William H. Luers, Deputy Assistant Secretary for European Affairs
Gregory F. Treverton, NSC Staff member [Notetaker]2
Edvard Kardelj, Member of the Presidency of the Socialist Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia
Dimce Belovski, Yugoslav Ambassador to the United States
Emil Ludviger, Member of the Federal Executive Council and Federal Secretary
for Foreign Trade
Dragan Bernardic, Assistant Federal Secretary for Foreign Affairs
Svetozar Starcevic, Director of the Political Department, Federal Secretary for
Foreign Affairs
Borislav Lazarevic, Chef de Cabinet for Mr. Kardelj
Radivoje Petkovic, Minister-Counselor, Yugoslav Embassy
Vladimir Matic, Political Counselor, Yugoslav Embassy
Branka Jojic, Interpreter
Mr. Kardelj opened the meeting by thanking the President for his
invitation and for taking the time for the meeting. He handed the
President the original of a letter from President Tito, indicating that
the President had already been informed of the letter’s contents. The
President said he read the letter that morning. He was honored to have
Kardelj in Washington. He said that he and his colleagues had been
reviewing Kardelj’s book, and he congratulated him on his role as a
statesman and author. Kardelj said he was not sure he deserved the
compliments; he and others in Yugoslavia had done what they had to.
The President expressed gratitude for the reception given to the
Vice President in Yugoslavia, saying that it and this visit confirmed
the White House memorandum of conversation notes that the meeting took place in the
Oval Office, a Department of State memorandum of the conversation drafted by Luers
places the meeting in the Cabinet Room. (Ibid.)
2 All brackets are in the original.

Yugoslavia
the friendship of the two nations. He looked forward to President Tito’s
visit this spring, and he thanked Kardelj for delivering the letter. He
found President Tito’s report very helpful. He noted that the Yugoslavs
were eager to have the US begin discussions with North Korea, and
he reminded Kardelj that he had told President Tito of our commitment
to the South Koreans not to begin those discussions without them. We
want a peaceful solution and would like to explore with the Yugoslavs
how progress might be made, while assuring the South Koreans of our
commitment. He again thanked Kardelj for the report and said he
would study it with great care.
Tito’s Trip
Kardelj said much of what President Tito wrote would be familiar
to the President. He emphasized that the North Koreans want a peaceful
solution. With regard to China there was not much new to report.
President Tito had the impression that the Chinese were aware of their
differences with the US. At the same time there was some coincidence
of interests. They wanted better relations with Washington; of course,
however, there were conditions, including Taiwan. Apart from that,
one way or another, the Chinese wanted to cooperate. He said the
welcome that the Chinese had given President Tito had greatly
exceeded their expectations; it was much warmer than they had
expected. That seemed a sympton of a deep change in Chinese policy,
the beginning of an opening to the world. In that sense, the attention
given to Tito was not meant for him alone.
President Tito had found it interesting that the Chinese had appar-
ently decided to accelerate their economic development, especially in
the industrial sector. They had introduced material incentives quite at
odds with previous policy.
Kardelj thought the Chinese could be a very positive force in inter-
national affairs in the future. Of course, the Yugoslavs realized that
China’s attitude toward them was a function of the Chinese attitude
toward the Soviet Union. Yugoslavia wants good relations with China,
not to become their advocate with the Soviets, but rather because of
the positive, independent role in world affairs.
In his discussions in the Soviet Union, President Tito did not
encounter serious difficulties. The two parties preserved their positions
unchanged, and the well-known differences continue to exist. The
Soviet Union dislikes both Yugoslavia’s non-alignment and its internal
system, but it understands that those will not change, and it is prepared
to develop its relations with Belgrade. Yugoslavia desires similar devel-
opment; its location, both geographic and strategic, requires special
efforts at good relations with the Soviet Union, despite differences with
it. That is necessary for peace in Europe. Yugoslavia will maintain its

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
own ideas about non-alignment and internal structure. Kardelj felt the
Soviets now understood that, and thus relations had improved. Within
this general framework, the Soviets seemed preoccupied with their
relations with the US—with detente and disarmament.
The President thought that perhaps because of Tito’s discussions
in Moscow, the Soviets had been more cooperative in recent weeks in
SALT and other discussions, and he asked Kardelj to tell President
Tito that relations had improved. US-Soviet discussions had been freer
and more productive. There had been progress in SALT and on CTB;
no final agreements had been concluded, but the US was encouraged
by progress. The US had talked with the Soviets about building a
constructive attitude at Belgrade. The President hoped that the terms
of the Final Act and compliance with it would be discussed openly
and freely, but without aggravating difference. We will be forceful but
not in a way which will disturb detente. The Belgrade conference is
important to us, and we appreciate the good influence of President
Tito in bringing us together for common purposes.
The President stressed that the unity and strength of Yugoslavia,
as well as its non-alignment, are very important to world peace; they
are important to us as well. He said he was eager to have constant
exchanges of views with the Yugoslavs, and he hoped that Kardelj
would not hesitate to contact him when he could aid relations.
The President said that the US wanted to move toward peace, to
diminish armaments levels in the world and the threat posed by nuclear
weapons, to extinguish the flames of war. Yugoslav advice and coopera-
tion would be important.
Kardelj said he was happy to hear the President’s views because
he also felt that the big and small nations should participate equally
in solving major global problems. Yugoslavia supports detente and
recognizes that US-Soviet relations are decisive for world peace. But
for efforts to succeed, other nations, including the non-aligned, must
participate. Yugoslavia wants to contribute to developing less confron-
tation and more cooperation in the world.
In that context, Kardelj welcomed the President’s statement that
the US not only sought arms limitation, but wanted to reduce arms.
He reiterated that all countries should participate; at the same time,
the balance of power is important to global strategy, and especially to
Yugoslav independence. Still the effort should be made to move to
lower levels of arms. Kardelj was unsure whether Yugoslavia’s influ-
ence on the Soviets, or President Tito’s own, had been important. But
President did what he could to make steps toward US-Soviet under-
standing, an understanding valid for disarmament and for other fields.
Perhaps the Soviets did react to President Tito’s comments in their
discussions with the President.

Yugoslavia
Kardelj hoped there would be more Soviet-American efforts but
stressed that in discussing problems, the US and the Soviet Union
should talk with the non-aligned nations. All nations should take part
if they have an interest—for instance, in southern Africa. There is
distrust, and it is not easy for parties to accept cooperative efforts. Yet
those efforts are still positive; the more that non-aligned and other
nations take part, the more chance there is of reaching solutions. In
particular, the superpowers ought to act to increase the strength of
non-aligned nations. There are always tensions and the possibility of
local wars. If the major blocs appear to be behind those tensions, then
arms pour in, aggravating local tensions. Thus, the non-aligned nations
should participate in the attempt to preserve peace. Kardelj indicated
that President Tito wanted to know the President’s view on non-aligned
nations and their role.
US Global Policies
The President indicated that he had to leave soon but wanted
to make several points before he did. He first asked Kardelj for his
assessment of the Middle East, the controversy between Ethiopia and
Somalia, and other areas of tension. He said that Yugoslav views were
important, and he wanted to hear them, particularly on the Middle East.
The President recognized that some policies of the United States
would create problems for the Yugoslavs. He hoped that Kardelj would
be able to resolve those difficulties in his conversations at the State
Department. It is hard to change the policies, but he wanted to diminish
the problems caused for the Yugoslavs by them.
He expressed the hope that US investments in Yugoslavia would
grow. We would like to build plants and other facilities in Yugoslavia.
However, there is a problem with US policy on investment guarantees.
He and Congress prefer that those guarantees go to the poorest nations.
Yugoslavia had done so well that it was difficult to justify extending
guarantees to it. The US would do the best it could, but if guarantees
could not be given, the President wanted the Yugoslavs to understand
that there was no anti-Yugoslav motivation.
With regard to arms transfers, the President said that the US would
like to supply some of Yugoslavia’s needs; the Secretaries of State and
Defense would be prepared to discuss that subject further. The United
States is attempting to work with arms suppliers to reduce overall
transfers. One means of doing so is to induce consumers to reduce
their purchases. But the US is prepared to sell some weaponry to
Yugoslavia, and we will talk further with the Yugoslavs. However,
those discussions are within the context of a general promise—applying
to all countries—to the American people to cut overall transfers each
year. We will work with the Yugoslavs.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
With regard to atomic power, the President stressed that the US
is committed to nuclear energy but also to prohibiting transfers that
could be used in nuclear explosions. There is no doubt that Yugoslavia
is trustworthy and shares the same goals as the United States. Yet as
the US develops laws, it may find that the rules governing sales of
nuclear equipment are not as flexible as some might like. The President
indicated that we would try to meet Yugoslav needs but that there
might be difficulties from time to time. Again, the President hoped
that problems could be discussed frankly and that any constraint would
not be interpreted as a blow to our friendship for Yugoslavia. We will
be as flexible as we can within the law, and the President suggested
that Kardelj discuss these issues further with US Cabinet officers.
Middle East
The President asked for Kardelj’s assessment of the Middle East,
saying that he wanted Kardelj brought up to date and was interested
in his views.
Kardelj said he had read the US statement issued that day and
thought it was a step toward peace.3 In the Yugoslavs view, the Palestin-
ians are the central issue. From the start their status has been a major
cause of war. At present the Palestinians seem radical to Israel, but it
is hard to keep up with their position. Yugoslavia has close contacts
with the Palestinians and thinks they are ready to change. However,
it is difficult for them to move without first having a guarantee of some
rights. Qaddumi4 was recently in Yugoslavia and, knowing that Kardelj
was coming to the US, asked what the US meant by “homeland.”
Kardelj thought that the Palestinians were ready for peace; the
Palestinian issue is a hard one, but the Palestinians seem ready to
recognize Israel and the Israeli borders at the end of the first war. It
is hard to see how relations between Israel and the Palestinians could
be regulated, but if there were a long-term solution, then it should be
possible to settle relations. The Palestinians would have access to the
Mediterranean through Israel. Kardelj stressed that it would be impor-
tant to have an independent Palestine; any other arrangement would
be a hotbed in the Middle East, something that is up to the US to make
Israel understand. Kardelj thought that with any Israeli concession the
Palestinian position would soften.
3 In statements issued following Carter’s meeting with Syrian Foreign Minister Abd
al Halim Khaddam, and with Jordanian President of the Royal Court Abddul Hamid
Sharaf and Jordanian Foreign Minister Hassan Ibrahim, the White House stressed that
it had “agreed on the importance of working to reconvene the Geneva conference by
4 Farouk Kaddoumi also known as Abu al-Lutf, Palestinian Liberation Organization
(PLO) leader.

Yugoslavia
Finally, Kardelj noted that all Arab states have recognized the PLO
as the representative of the Palestinian people. In his press conference,
the President had mentioned the possibility of a flexible solution.5
Kardelj thought that might work but believed it important that the
PLO be represented.
The President said that the US was willing to talk with the PLO,
even with Arafat, but that first the PLO had to agree—as had all other
states of the region—to negotiate on the basis of UN resolutions 242
and 338. As long as the PLO refuses to do that it is impossible for the
US to talk directly with it. The President said he knew the PLO trusted
the Yugoslavs and suggested that the Yugoslavs might use their good
offices to get the PLO to make a declaration that it agreed with the
principles of those UN resolutions. If the PLO wanted to add language
indicating that something more than a refugee problem was involved—
indicating, perhaps, the need for a homeland—that would be okay
with the United States. But so far the PLO has rejected even that course.
The US had signed, and the President indicated he had confirmed, an
agreement with Israel that PLO acceptance of 242 was a prerequisite
for US dealings with that organization. The President said he would
appreciate any Yugoslav help. He looked forward to reports of Kardelj’s
talks with Cabinet officers.
The President presented Kardelj a book of satellite photographs,
indicating that he thought one was of the Yugoslav coast. He said the
photos were available to Yugoslavia any time they would be useful.
Kardelj presented the President with a gift from President Tito for the
President’s birthday. The President expressed his thanks to Kardelj
and to President Tito. Kardelj said that any time the President could
come to Yugoslavia, it would be a pleasure to welcome him.
[At 11:25 a.m., the President and the Vice President left; other
participants remained and the meeting continued.6]
5 In a press conference on September 29, Carter stressed that if the PLO were to
accept UN Resolution 242 and the right of Israel to exist, the United States would begin
negotiations with the PLO on the Palestinian question. (Public Papers: Carter, 1977,
Book II, pp. 1687–1688)
6 No memorandum of conversation for the remainder of the meeting was found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
245.
Memorandum of Conversation1
SUBJECT
Secretary Brown’s Meetings in Limited Sessions with Yugoslav Federal Secretary
of National Defense Ljubicic
PARTICIPANTS
Yugoslavia
Federal Secretary of National Defense, General of the Army Ljubicic
Chief of the General Staff, Colonel General Potocar
Assistant Chief of the General Staff for Operations, Colonel General Radakovic
Lieutenant Colonel General Stojicic
Colonel Grkovic
US
The Secretary
US Ambassador to Yugoslavia Eagleburger
ASD/ISA, Mr. McGiffert
Army Attache, Embassy Belgrade, Colonel Bartos (notetaker)
FIRST LIMITED MEETING
This initial private meeting at 0940 on 13 October immediately
preceded the first plenary session.2 The purpose of this meeting, limited
to the principals and a few of their assistants, was to permit a free
discussion of broad strategic issues and to provide General Ljubicic
with an opportunity, if he chose, to be very candid with the Secretary.
General Ljubicic opened the meeting by stressing the significance
the Yugoslav Government attaches to the visit of such an important
individual as Secretary Brown to Yugoslavia; that he has expectations
of the relationship between the two countries expanding. However, he
pointed out that cooperation of one power does not exclude cooperation
Drafted by Commander Eric A. McVadon on November 3; approved by David E. McGif-
fert on November 16. The meeting took place at the Federal Secretariat of National
Defense.
2 A memorandum of conversation of the first plenary session, which consisted of
a general presentation of U.S. policy on arms transfers to Yugoslavia, is ibid. Following
his meeting with Ljubicic, Brown met with Yugoslav Vice President of the Presidency
Stefan Doronjoski. (Ibid.)

Yugoslavia
with another power and that such cooperation should not be directed
against another power. He then continued into the standard explana-
tion of the Yugoslav nonalignment policy. Secretary Brown replied that
his influence in the USG should not be overestimated. Brown pointed
out that the US military relationship was part of a general relation-
ship which had as its objective the support of Yugoslav independ-
ence. Brown hoped that his presence in Belgrade would be the begin-
ning of an increased military relationship. Brown invited Ljubi-
cic to the US for a reciprocal visit. Ljubicic quickly accepted the
invitation.
After stating that the time for the Ljubicic visit would be worked
out, Brown pointed out that US-Yugoslav military arms negotiations
have had difficulties in the past primarily because of trying to determine
what procedures should be followed. Brown said that sometimes the US
has had a long list of Yugoslav requests to which it has not responded
promptly. However, when the US responded positively, the US has
not heard from the Yugoslavs. Brown said that the US should respond
“Yes” or “No” to the Yugoslav requests promptly, but when the US
responds “Yes” to the Yugoslav requests, the Yugoslavs should buy.
Brown emphasized the point by stating, “If you don’t want to buy,
don’t ask us to sell. In return, the US will not take too much time
coming up with an answer.”
Brown then turned to the subject of Yugoslav tank transfers to
Ethiopia. He said that he was referring to this subject to put it behind
both countries; that by law the Congress had to be notified; that every
effort was made not to embarrass the Yugoslav Government in public;
that the issue is closed. Ljubicic responded that the tank issue was
unpleasant; that it was a Yugoslav mistake in administration; that he
was glad that the tank difficulty had been overcome; that the tank
issue should not affect other arms negotiations; that it was a one-time
failure in thirty years. Ljubicic, however, defended the Yugoslav action
as follows: He said that the tanks were ready for scrap; that the US
officials were advised of this, but the GOY received no answer nor did
the USG express any interest. He repeated that the Yugoslavs made a
mistake on the issue and that he was not trying to justify the mistake.
He pointed out, however, that when the Yugoslavs provided tanks to
Ethiopia, Soviet military instructors were not in Ethiopia but only in
Somalia; that at that time the Ethiopians were more involved with
nonaligned countries and less with the Soviet Union. Now there are
Russian tanks and Russian military instructors in Ethiopia; the country
is more under Russian control. Brown interjected that the problem
was solved.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
At this point Ljubicic said that arms negotiations procedures could
be worked out and asked Brown about SALT II. He wanted to know
where the US is in SALT and where it expects to go. Brown replied
that in SALT II the US was interested in reduction of the strategic
forces on each side, in reducing the rate of new weapon deployment
and development in equality and stability to preclude either side from
being tempted to launch an attack, in precluding either side from
developing systems aimed at the vulnerabilities of the other side. Brown
said that this last point was probably the most difficult. Also, he pointed
out that the problem of that which each side defines as a strategic
system and counts in the strategic aggregate continues to complicate
the negotiations. Brown said that the US is concerned over the rapid
build-up of Soviet ICBM’s with MIRV’s. As a result of this Soviet
build-up, the US sees US ICBM’s becoming vulnerable as Soviet ICBM
numbers and accuracy increase. Brown said that the US has strategic
bombers that can takeoff before the Soviet missiles land, and the US
also has SLBM’s which are not vulnerable. Despite this he still consid-
ered the Soviet ICBM build-up as destabilizing. Brown said that he
wonders as he views the building of new Soviet ICBM’s and the enlarge-
ment of air defense and civil defense systems whether the Soviets really
plan to survive a thermonuclear war. He said he viewed such an idea
as unrealistic, but if the Soviets believe they can, then it is a very
dangerous situation. Brown said that from the US side, the main imped-
iment to an agreement stems from the inability to establish agreeable
limits on the Soviet buildup of ICBM number and capability and the
inclusion of Soviet Backfire bombers which the US believes to be stra-
tegic because they can reach the US. The Soviet side contends the
Backfire is not strategic and does not want to include it in the strategic
aggregate. From the Soviet viewpoint, US cruise missiles present a
serious impediment to an agreement.
Brown then proceeded to outline the cruise missile issue. He said
that there were two general kinds of cruise missiles: those launched
from an aircraft and those which are land-based or sea-based. He said
that the air-launched cruise missile was needed to penetrate Soviet air
defense. He said that, if air defenses are formidable, air-launched cruise
missiles are needed to penetrate them, since it is difficult for a bomber
to do so. Turning to the sea-based or land-based cruise missile, Brown
said that these systems present a political-military problem because
they might be based in or near Europe. The issue of the sea-based and
land-based cruise missiles is further complicated by the fact that the
Soviets have deployed SS–20 MRBM’s with MIRV’s opposite NATO
countries. The Soviet Union does not consider this system strategic

Yugoslavia
because it does not have enough range to reach the US and, therefore,
believes it should not be limited in SALT; Brown then pointed out the
inconsistency of Soviet arguments when attempting to limit US land-
based and sea-based cruise missiles and at the same time deploying
the SS–20 MRBM’s.
Brown indicated that the US and the Soviets were close to a SALT
II agreement; however, in this agreement, the resolution of some issues
would be postponed. Brown said at Vladivostok a strategic aggregate
of 2400 was agreed upon, but now both sides have reduced their
number and are negotiating at between 2160–2250. Brown emphasized
that this is not a concession because the agreed number would be equal
for both sides.
ICBM/SCBM MIRV’s with a sub-limit of 800–850 land-based ICBM’s
would be a limit on the deployment of sea-based and land-based cruise
missiles beyond 600 kms. All tests beyond 600 kms would be air-
launched. (4) The limit on air-launched cruise missiles would be 2500
kms, but this would be for a three-year period. (5) The limits on the
mobile missiles would apply to deploying and testing the missile but
not to testing the launchers. (6) Some sort of assurance of limitation
on Backfire bombers, possibly involving production rate, refueling and
training. Ljubicic asked a question to clarify the 2500 kms limit. Brown
said that it would apply for three years to air-launched cruise missiles.
Ljubicic was satisfied with the explanation. Brown, continuing to com-
ment on SALT, said that the bombers and cruise missiles are less
destabilizing than ICBM’s as it takes longer for them to get on target;
i.e., about eight hours. Ljubicic commented that SALT II agreement
appears to protect the interests of the Soviet Union and the US; for
example, a 600 kms cruise missile from [less than 1 line not declassified]
would be militarily significant to Yugoslavia, so from the Yugoslav
standpoint there would be no difference in the 2500 or 600 kms limits.
Brown said that the 600 kms and the 2500 kms cruise missile limits
make a difference to the Soviet Union.
Ljubicic then asked if there was an attempt to reduce the stock of
[less than 1 line not declassified]. Brown replied that this issue is not
included in SALT and explained the omission of forward-based systems
as nonstrategic systems in SALT. Brown cited Soviet SS–4, SS–5, and SS–
20 missile systems and US aircraft that are forward-based as excluded
in all negotiations. He said that such systems could be included in a
separate forum or a SALT III agreement. Ljubicic told Brown that he
did not ask about systems that threaten Russia, but that he is talking
about stocks of nuclear weapons that threaten Yugoslavia. He said that
he would like to see detente enlarged to all countries, to make the
world more secure. Brown said that he understood.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
Ljubicic then asked Brown if he thought Yugoslavia could produce
a 300 kms cruise missile. Brown said it could be produced in the future
easily. Ljubicic (jokingly ?) asked Brown if he would provide assistance
to produce such a weapon. Brown said “No.” Then Brown said that it
is still not clear whether a cruise missile is a good means to deliver a
nuclear weapon. Ljubicic said that he was against a monopoly of any
kind. Brown retorted that proliferation is worse.
Ljubicic asked what Brown could tell him about the neutron
bomb. He said that SALT as it concerns Yugoslavia is a ratio or
balance between big powers; that it is concerned with strategic
weapons systems and does not contribute to general disarmament
in the conventional sphere; that new conventional armament is taking
place: new Soviet bombers, tanks, satellite bombs, meteorological
warfare. It was in this context that Ljubicic asked about neutron
bombs. Brown replied that some of the things that Ljubicic mentioned
are ideas and some are more than ideas. Brown said he thought
that nuclear weapons should be limited at as low a level as possible
but that this level must be balanced. He added that the US can
compete in all areas; that the Soviets have concluded that they can
compete better in military areas and the US, therefore, must be
prepared to respond to this Soviet emphasis by taking appropriate
action. Ljubicic said that, when Tito talked to Brezhnev, Tito concluded
that Brezhnev was genuinely interested in detente. Brown then went
through an explanation of the effects of neutron bombs. He talked
about how the blast effect is reduced and how the radiation is
increased, making a comparison with an ordinary nuclear weapon.
He pointed out that the bombs were designed mainly for use against
large tank columns; that the use of such bombs would force tank
columns to disperse, thus reducing the effectiveness of large tank
formations. Brown said that such weapons would not reduce the
threshold of nuclear war and would not be used unless there was
an invasion. He emphasized US political control and the impact of
the weapon on the prevention of war. Ljubicic agreed that he saw
the military justification for such a weapon, but added that if war
started such a weapon could be used on small countries. He recalled
a conversation of the subject of neutron bombs with the Soviet
Minister of Defense, Ustinov, who said that now that the Americans
were developing such a weapon system, Ustinov would have to
assure development of such a weapon for the Soviet Union. Brown
said that use of tactical nuclear weapons is a political question. Each
country has to decide for itself whether such weapons increase or
decrease the chances of nuclear warfare.
Brown said that because of the sensitivity of the Yugoslav-US
relations, the demands of the Western press, and presence of many

Yugoslavia
reporters in the city covering CSCE he planned to provide background
information to the reporters at a press conference in order to make
sure that the inevitable news stories were accurate. Ljubicic agreed.
After an exchange of pleasantries, the meeting broke up.
SECOND LIMITED MEETING
The second private meeting between SecDef and General Ljubicic
SecDef began by explaining that he requested the meeting after Mr.
Bernardic expressed to Ambassador Eagleburger the concern of the
Yugoslavs over the results of the first plenary session. SecDef did
not want such issues to remain unanswered, nor that the US side be
misunderstood. He stressed that he viewed his visit as the beginning
of a process and did not plan to reach final agreements during the
visit. He repeated his exposition of the previous day concerning the
recent decision by President Carter to increase military sales to Yugo-
slavia of defensive weapons but not to transfer sensitive technology.
This decision was taken concurrently with the President’s decision to
reduce arms sales worldwide, and the significance of these two deci-
sions should not be overlooked. He explained that the purpose of this
visit was to describe the new Presidential decision and to begin the
process of putting it into effect. It will be a lengthy process requiring
more meetings, probably at a lower level. The Secretary said that he
hoped to see General Ljubicic in the United States when such a trip
would be convenient.
Brown said that further staff meetings will be necessary and the
specifics of individual weapons will result from such meetings. That
will take time. Concerning the new procedures, there must be full
understanding on both sides in order to overcome past problems. We
must understand Yugoslav needs for equipment in order for US to
meet the needs. The Secretary explained that the Yugoslav Embassy
in Washington will still play an important role. Many past problems
resulted from absence of a single US point of interest. The various
agencies involved—American contractors, American military services,
our Defense Security Assistance Agency, the Embassy in Belgrade—
do not always know what the others are doing. He suggested that we
should initiate the new process by sending an expert from Washington
who is thoroughly familiar with our procedures to advise our Embassy
and Yugoslav officials and, if the Yugoslavs wished, the Yugoslav
3 The second plenary session, which followed the unscheduled private meeting on
October 14, consisted of a Yugoslav presentation of military cooperation with the United
States and Yugoslav expectations. (Ibid.)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
defense attache in Washington, Col Vuckovic, could accompany the
experts to help get the new process underway.
The Secretary said that when General Cemalovic4 meets with Gen-
eral Fish5 in Washington on 17 October, we will discuss various candi-
date systems in which General Cemalovic expressed interest—air
defense systems, air-ground anti-tank weapons, and other Air Force
systems. General Ljubicic interjected that the aircraft engine would also
probably be discussed, to which Secretary Brown agreed.
The Secretary said that certain weapons are consistent with Yugoslav
interests and with our new arms transfer policy concerning sensitive
technology. He pointed out examples, specifically Harpoon, in which
the US said “No” not only to Yugoslavia but also to others who were
either friendly but not Allies, or were Allies, and cited Kuwait, Bahrain,
United Arab Emirates, the Philippines, and the Republic of China. He
said that we want to be clear that we are not singling out Yugoslavia
for negative treatment.
Secretary Brown said that the definition of sensitive technology
depends upon time. In some cases our policy prevents transfer now.
In those cases, SecDef proposed that we would first discuss Yugoslav
needs and when those needs must be filled, and then discuss alterna-
tives, since some alternatives may not be sensitive enough to prevent
their future release.
The Secretary assessed overall US-Yugoslav relations as improving
in economic, political, cultural, and in military areas since the Mondale
visit. He described the purpose of his visit as beginning and advancing
the consultation process in order to advance military relations as
progress is made in other areas. He completed his statement by express-
ing the hope that he has cleared up any misunderstandings, but noting
that the US is still unable to transfer all systems desired by the Yugo-
slavs. General Ljubicic thanked SecDef for his information. He recog-
nized the impossibility of much progress in an initial meeting. He
stated that if the US offered many things now, Yugoslavia probably
could not absorb them all. However, he considered that the list could
contain more equipment that it did. General Ljubicic stated that the
Yugoslavs understand US regulations and our organization and will
try to adapt to us. He continued that one responsible for the Defense
of his country must consider why it is impossible to acquire necessary
equipment. Certain time is required, and patience will be required. He
4 Colonel General Enver Cemalovic was commander of the Yugoslav Air Force and
Air Defense Forces.
5 Lieutenant General Howard M. Fish was Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense
(International Security Affairs) for Security Assistance and Director of the Defense Secu-
rity Assistance Agency until March 1978.

Yugoslavia
acknowledged that more was expected than was offered, but that this
fact in no way decreases the significance of Secretary Brown’s visit. It
opened the door and more will come later. The Secretary agreed and
responded that we should move forward now and try to resolve prob-
lems which exist.
General Ljubicic stated that regarding procedures, the American
expert can come. He added that Yugoslavia does not want to create
problems with the administration and Congress, and that there are
people who oppose cooperation with Yugoslavia. SecDef concluded the
meeting with the observation that the modest expansion of military
relations and arms transfers will be generally popular and approved
by the American people and Congress.
246.
Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to
President Carter1
Washington, October 20, 1977
SUBJECT
Report on Trip to Yugoslavia and Italy
Last week I went to Yugoslavia to begin the process of modestly
increasing our military relationship with the GOY, to Bari in southern
Italy to attend the NATO Nuclear Planning Group meeting, to Rome
to meet with senior Italian officials, and to the Sixth Fleet at sea in
the Mediterranean. I believe we accomplished a number of positive
objectives, and also avoided negative effects. Ambassadors Gardner
and Eagleburger, as well as our senior military commanders in NATO,
contributed substantially to that result.
Yugoslavia. I was warmly treated throughout the visit: the Yugo-
slavs were clearly interested in promoting a better relationship. I met
principally with Defense Minister Ljubicic and a few colleagues, but
also paid calls on two other members of the ruling hierarchy (Doronjski
and Djuranovic). Tito was in Paris.
Each side’s litany provided the framework for the discussion. On
our side, this was an expression of support for the independence,
“Good report J.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
territorial integrity, and non-alignment of Yugoslavia. On their side,
it was their desire for improved relations without prejudice to their
cherished non-alignment and national unity.
They implied they were more afraid of an attack by Bulgaria2 than
by the Soviet Union. But if they were overmatched, they were (they
said) prepared to retreat to the mountains, as in World War II, and
fight on as guerrillas. On the political side, they would not admit that
their internal ethnic differences created political instability, but they
were at least willing to recognize the potential for such trouble. They
noted that Albania and Bulgaria both claimed Yugoslav territory.
They asked about SALT, including cruise missiles, and I gave quite
a detailed explanation. Ljubicic remarked that, while a SALT agreement
might benefically limit systems by which the US and Russia threaten
each other, it would not necessarily make the smaller countries more
secure. He asked about reduction of [less than 1 line not declassified]. I
responded that that issue was not included in SALT although eventu-
ally forward-based and other non-strategic systems would probably
be dealt with in SALT or some other forum. Ljubicic asked about the
neutron bomb and I explained its military purpose.
As to an enhanced military supply relationship, I outlined our
desire to be forthcoming within certain limits (e.g. defensive weapons
only, no sensitive technology) and stressed the need for better proce-
dures to avoid the misunderstandings of the past. I gave a few illustra-
tions of weapons which we would be willing to provide and which
we would not be willing to provide. By pointing out that you had
endorsed enlarging the US-GOY relationship while at the same time
ordering a world-wide reduction in our arms transfers, I noted our
special interest in them.
While they welcomed the US attitude in general, the Yugoslavs
expressed disappointment as to specifics. I believe this concern was
somewhat alleviated by my emphasizing that our visit was designed
to start a process rather than to result in definitive decisions. They
indicated that their principal interests lay in high technology anti-
armor, anti-air and anti-landing (helicopter and airborne) weapons.
While we can modestly expand our relationship, the process will not
be easy because Yugoslavia’s desires will frequently involve systems
too sensitive for release. Most of their arms purchases (they say they
make 75 percent themselves) are from the USSR. They buy about
550 million a year from the U.K.; our own sales are no more than a
couple of million a year.3
2 Carter underlined “Bulgaria.”
that 550 should have read 50.”

Yugoslavia
I invited Ljubicic to visit the US sometime next year and he quickly
accepted. We will use that visit as a target against which to manage
plans for improving the military relationship. The next steps will be a
visit to the US (now underway) by the Chief of the Yugoslav Air Force
and a visit to Belgrade by US experts to explain FMS procedures.
[Omitted here is Brown’s report on the NATO Nuclear Planning
Group and his conversations in Rome.]
247.
Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the
Department of State (Tarnoff) to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, February 10, 1978
SUBJECT
Tito Visit: Export License for Nuclear Fuel for Krsko
As before the Vice President’s visit to Belgrade last May, the most
serious issue in our relations on the eve of the Tito visit is the dispute
over nuclear exports to Yugoslavia. At that time a compromise was
worked out permitting the Nuclear Regulatory Commission to license
the export of the Krsko nuclear reactor on the basis of, inter alia,
Yugoslav agreement to negotiate with us on the conditions governing
use of fuel in Krsko. The current issue involves the precise nature of
U.S. approval rights over retransfer and reprocessing.
Yugoslavia, which is a party to the NPT, a cooperating member
of the IAEA, and a participant in INFCE, has consistently indicated its
willingness to accept universally applicable safeguards which result
from new international agreements. The Yugoslavs, however, have
resisted what they regard as U.S. attempts to impose additional, unilat-
eral and discriminatory conditions on existing agreements. They have
also said they are unwilling to “tie their hands” with regard to a future
reprocessing option. (We are aware of no current Yugoslav plans to
recycle or reprocess.) Furthermore, the Yugoslavs have been extremely
memorandum was requested during an interagency meeting at the Department of State
on February 7 held to discuss the status of preparations for the Tito visit. (Telegram

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
sensitive to any proposed conditions which do not already apply to
other recipients of U.S. fuel. They have in particular focused on U.S.
willingness to ship fuel to India—a non-NPT party with a “bad
record”—and argue that Yugoslavia should in no case be asked to
provide more, in the way of assurances, than did India.
Although the existing agreements on Krsko give the U.S. most of
the assurances required immediately by our pending nuclear legisla-
tion, they fail to provide us with prior approval rights over reprocessing
of U.S. fuel and they cover retransfer of only the first fuel core. We
have been seeking additional Yugoslav assurances which not only
satisfy these immediate criteria but which also would be consistent
with the legislative requirements for new agreements, i.e., U.S. approval
rights over disposition of any fuel used in a U.S.-supplied reactor. We
have explained to the Yugoslav Government that since we expect to
continue to cooperate with Yugoslavia in nuclear energy programs,
we would prefer to resolve the entire issue now rather than to work
out a “quick fix” on U.S. fuel only and then have to renegotiate that
agreement within the 18 month time limit of the legislation. Further-
more, an agreement on U.S. fuel only would be more difficult to sell to
the NRC. Should the Yugoslavs resist our proposed long-term solution,
however, it may be necessary to work out a compromise combining
approval rights on U.S. fuel with a provision for exclusive use of U.S.
fuel in the Krsko reactor.
Following discussions in Washington in late December, we will
resume negotiations in Belgrade February 16–18 in the hope of resolv-
ing this issue before Tito’s arrival2. However, the Yugoslavs—who
have already indicated that Tito will personally make the final decision
on what additional assurances can be given—may decide to raise this
problem in the Presidential talks in March.
Peter Tarnoff3
the Yugoslav team and reached a tentative understanding on dealing with the nuclear
fuel issue for the Krsko reactor. (Telegram 1407 from Belgrade, February 21; National
of an exchange of letters among the Department of State, the Yugoslav Foreign Ministry,
and IAEA covering the disposition of spent fuel from the Krsko plant. (Telegram 49293
to Belgrade, February 25; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
3 David Anderson signed for Tarnoff above this typed signature.

Yugoslavia
248.
Memorandum From Robert Hunter of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, February 15, 1978
SUBJECT
Tito Visit: Economic Cooperation
Larry Eagleburger proposed the setting up of a government-to-
government economic commission with Yugoslavia,2 to replace the
current non-governmental one, as part of Tito’s visit. We asked State,
Commerce, and Treasury for a recommendation. (See Tab II.)3
They have recommended that there be two working groups,
instead—one here and one in Belgrade—which could meet alternatively
every few months.4 Commerce Assistant Secretary Weil would co-chair
the one here; and Eagleburger there. This course was chosen because:
—the nature of the Yugoslav economy does not require the same
kind of apparatus as for Poland, Romania, or the Soviet Union;
—the Yugoslavs would probably prefer having an arrangement
different from that of other states; and
—once meetings start at a high level, they cannot then be down-
graded.
We sought a further judgment on this point, especially in view of
Larry’s initial recommendation. State says that he now concurs, and
thus so do I.
2 Noting the successful development of relations between the United States and
Yugoslavia during the first year of the Carter administration, Eagleburger proposed the
creation of a joint economic/trade commission chaired at the Assistant Secretary level
to better coordinate U.S. policy in the economic field. (Telegram 8574 from Belgrade,
requested the opinion of the Department of State on the idea of establishing a Joint
Economic Council with Yugoslavia. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski
initially proposed setting up both a Joint Economic Council and a Joint Defense Council,
but both Brzezinski and Aaron opposed the idea of a Defense Council. (Ibid.)
4 Tarnoff forwarded the Department’s concurrence in a memorandum to Brzezinski
on January 16. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
RECOMMENDATION:
That you approve the memorandum for Secretary Vance at Tab I.5
5 Attached but not printed is a February 17 memorandum in which Brzezinski
informed Vance that “your recommendation for two U.S.-Yugoslav Economic/Commer-
cial Working Groups” was approved and noted that “while this approach may be
discussed and agreed with the Yugoslavs now, public announcement should be reserved
for President Tito’s visit to Washington.”
249.
Telegram From the Embassy in Yugoslavia to the
Department of State1
1570. Subject: Tito Visit—The Bilateral Relationship.
Overview:
1. Tito’s visit to the U.S. culminates more than a year of substantial
improvement in most areas of our bilateral relationship. The Yugoslavs
were quick to perceive in the foreign policy of the Carter administration
a more positive approach than they felt had existed in previous years
toward the development of good bilateral relations and toward a num-
ber of international issues important to them, such as the nonaligned
movement, North-South dialogue, and problem areas in the Middle
East and Africa. This perception, reinforced by concrete steps demon-
strating the importance both sides attached to a strengthened relation-
ship and expanded cooperation—notably the Mondale, Kardelj and
Brown visits and the Presidential correspondence—generated a
momentum that has led to what is widely regarded by Yugoslavs as
the best state of U.S.-Yugoslav relations since World War II. Against this
positive background, however, two major issues—ExImBank operating
procedures and Krsko fuel supply—remain unresolved on the eve of
the Tito visit, while a third important issue—military cooperation and
sales—awaits tangible implementation.
Political:
2. The tone of political relations with Yugoslavia has improved
profoundly in the past year. Issues now regarded by the Yugoslavs as
Secret; Immediate.

Yugoslavia
minor irritants would have been treated in a more serious light before
this period. The Yugoslavs recognize that in pursuing a political dia-
logue at all levels the U.S. has sought an enhanced, mature, cooperative
relationship without papering over matters on which we do not agree.
The Yugoslavs have shown a willingness to respond to this approach.
The personal correspondence between Presidents Carter and Tito on
key international issues has been an important element in creating
an atmosphere of confidence and cooperation at the senior levels of
government. The Yugoslavs must also be aware that Tito’s visit to
Washington is, significantly, the first by a Communist country leader
during the Carter administration.
3. The response on the party level has been longer in coming.
However, the LCY’s acceptance of a joint invitation from the Demo-
cratic and Republican National Committees to send a delegation to the
U.S. in the fall promises the possibility of an even larger extension of
the political dialogue.
4. Our recent actions in the U.S. with regard to the apprehension
and legal prosecution of emigre terrorists have temporarily mitigated
a major and traditional problem in our relations.
5. Nevertheless, our political relations still are fragile and any of
a host of unforeseen developments could adversely affect their positive
movement—grievous decisions emanating from the Belgrade Non-
aligned Meeting this year, an upsurge of anti-Yugoslav emigre activity
in the U.S. (especially during the Tito visit), fallout from the CSCE
Conference, the misreading of an incident similar to the “overflights”
occurrence. An important objective of the political dialogue is to help
insure that we are able to weather such occurrances.
Economic/Commercial:
6. It is in the economic and commercial area—perhaps more than
any other—that we can give concrete expression to the overall general
improvement in our bilateral relations. At the same time, however, it
is also the economic area in which disappointments over unfulfilled
promise can be greatest, and in which we now face a severe bilateral
problem—the current impasse over ExImBank’s operating procedures
in Yugoslavia.
7. The present state of the Yugoslav economy and Yugoslavia’s
economic balance between East and West provide both foreign policy
and commercial incentives for us to capitalize on the current status of
our bilateral relations. Committed [to] continuing a high rate of eco-
nomic growth domestically (GNP and industrial production rose by 7
rely on increasing imports of foreign equipment and technology, and
has had to borrow heavily abroad to pay for them. Now, increasingly
concerned by their growing economic reliance on the Soviet Union (the

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
alarmed by their burgeoning trade deficit with the Common Market (2.4
billion dollars in 1977), the Yugoslavs are clearly receptive to expanded
trade and economic cooperation with the U.S.
8. U.S. trade with Yugoslavia—which, according to U.S. statistics,
amounted to somewhat less than 700 million dollars and was nearly
balanced in 1977—is still in the developing stage but with a clear
potential for future growth. While Yugoslavia has been traditionally
oriented to West European suppliers and, for both political and eco-
nomic reasons, has channeled a substantial part of its trade to the East,
there is widespread interest in U.S. products and equipment because
of their reputation of quality and advanced technology. In the past
several years, U.S. companies have been increasingly active in exploit-
ing market opportunities both through direct sales and joint ventures
with Yugoslav partners. The U.S. is currently second among all coun-
tries in the number of joint ventures (17) and first in total equity partici-
pation (168 million dollars). Recently concluded joint ventures involv-
ing Dow Chemical and General Motors have received considerable
attention and have been cited as the kind of cooperative arrangements
that contribute to Yugoslavia’s economic development. Westinghouse
is the supplier for Yugoslavia’s first nuclear power plant at Krsko, and
is bidding actively on two major hydro and thermal power projects.
General Electric and GM are presently setting up business offices in
Belgrade.
9. Against this background, the current impasse over ExImBank’s
operating procedures in Yugoslavia assumes major significance. The
Bank has been an important source of financing U.S. equipment sales
to Yugoslavia, and its current overall exposure here is close to one
billion dollars. For large industrial projects requiring long-term loans, in
particular, ExIm financing has been a key ingredient. Having informed
ExIm that they could no longer furnish “superguarantees from the
National Bank, the Yugoslavs are currently considering whether they
can accept as a basis for discussion ExIm’s proposals for a solution
based on joint commercial bank guarantees, foreign exchange assur-
ances for loans over five million dollars, and governmental guarantees
in exceptional cases. In the meantime, the Yugoslav authorities have
informed their banks and enterprises that ExIm facilities are not cur-
rently available for financing imports from the U.S. Having reached
the point of confrontation, the issue represents a major irritant in our
bilateral relations on the eve of the Tito visit, and resolution of the
problem will be difficult unless the Yugoslavs are prepared to break
off their intransigent—albeit principled—position and demonstrate the
same willingness to negotiate which ExIm has shown.
10. The bilateral air agreement signed in December 1977 has settled
our major civil aviation difficulties with Yugoslavia, at least for the

Yugoslavia
moment. Although JAT received increased frequencies and capacity
rights in the agreement, the Yugoslavs are likely to press for additional
U.S. gateways (such as Chicago or Los Angeles) in the future.
11. There are no major outstanding bilateral agricultural trade prob-
lems at this time. Although the two-way trade balance in agricultural
products still favors Yugoslavia, it narrowed appreciably last year to
about 10 million dollars, due to increasing imports of soybeans and
soybean meal. If the GOY accepts the CCC credits for soybean pur-
chases currently being offered, then the agricultural trade gap should
close in 1978, even though our imports of hams are expected to increase.
12. The establishment of joint U.S.-Yugoslav economic working
groups, which we have proposed to the Yugoslavs as part of the Tito
visit, should provide a useful inter-governmental mechanism to
address economic and commercial problems on a regular basis.
Nonproliferation: Nuclear License for Krsko:
13. The trilateral agreement with the IAEA and GOY for the supply
of nuclear equipment and material for the Krsko nuclear plant being
built here by Westinghouse does not conform to the criteria for nuclear
exports now required by the USG and contained in pending antiprolif-
eration legislation. In December 1976, the Department moved to rectify
this and asked the GOY to grant the U.S. approval rights on retransfer
and reprocessing. The GOY has refused to accept any new conditions
unless internationally agreed. The Yugoslavs claim that the U.S. request
infringes national sovereignty, could impede their economic develop-
ment, and is unfair given Yugoslavia’s record on nonproliferation. To
avoid delaying the project, an equipment export license was issued last
May in return for the GOY’s commitment to negotiate the conditions
for the fuel export. Negotiations held on February 17–18 produced a
possible solution. However, the GOY may not have time to react before
the Tito visit. If Tito raises this issue, and he probably will, we suggest
a reply along the following lines:
—Place Krsko in the broader context of U.S. international policies
on disarmament and nonproliferation.
—Note that the USG and GOY objectives in nonproliferation are
identical.
—Note that USG nonproliferation policies are nondiscriminatory
and that the U.S. is not asking more from GOY than from other nations.
—Praise spirit of cooperation shown by Yugoslav side during
negotiations.
—Hope that a mutually satisfactory resolution will be found before
the fuel should be exported, autumn 1978.
Scientific Cooperation:
14. There are clear indications that the decline of bilateral scientific
cooperation will be raised during the Tito visit. On November 24, 1977,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
Finance Minister Cemovic wrote to Secretary Bluementhal2 asking that
U.S. Federal annuitants in Yugoslavia be paid in dollars (at current rates
12 million dollars annually) thus freeing dinars to support scientific
and cultural cooperation. A president of the Academy of Sciences and
Arts is included on the official delegation. Indeed, the subject has rarely
passed unmentioned in high-level visits and, given the rate at which
the scientific cooperative program is winding down, and our stock of
dinars is dwindling, this is probably the last chance for saving the joint
program. We recommend replying as follows:
—The Cemovic request is being given serious consideration.
—The existence of U.S.-owned excess dinars was a special circum-
stance that has come to an end.
—The USG is exploring possibilities for continuing cooperation.
Military Cooperation:
15. An important U.S. objective in Yugoslavia is to develop closer
contacts with the Yugoslav armed forces (JNA) than we have now. The
JNA and the LCY are Yugoslavia’s two strongest and most durable
politically-related institutions, and the political influence of both has
increased in the last six years. JNA’s ties to the political center have
been increased by a strong LCY organization within the JNA. In his
Dec. 22, 1977 Army Day toast, Tito called on the military to continue
its role of helping to preserve the unity of the nation, an unnecessary
reminder that the military is certain to be a determining factor in the
post-Tito era. In fact, under less than stable post-Tito conditions, the
military could become the strongest element in determining the succes-
sion and charting the country’s future. Tito, as Supreme Commander
of the JNA since its creation during World War II, has long been
involved intimately with this formidable all-Yugoslav institution.
16. In pursuit of our objective and complementary to the other
facets of our bilateral relationship, we have been attempting to enhance
military-to-military cooperation. This cooperative effort comprises sev-
eral components: (1) maintaining a regular series of ship visits to Yugo-
slav ports, and seeking to have an NPW visit at a favorable time; (2)
beginning a program of ship repairs in the Yugoslav shipyard at Tivat;
(3) seeking a mutually acceptable solution to overcome the barriers,
mostly financial, which now prevent JNA officers (the future military
leaders of Yugoslavia) from receiving professional U.S. military train-
ing; (4) establishing a military cooperation working group to examine
periodically all our activities; (5) high-level visits; and (6) military
equipment sales. Of all these, the last two are of most immediate
2 Not found.

Yugoslavia
interest to the Yugoslavs, and the last may be the key to a successful
relationship.
17. With the number of high-level visits last year and proposed
for this year, the pace has never been so high. In 1977 SecDef Brown
and CNO Holloway came to Yugoslavia and Yugoslav Air Force C/S
Cemalovic visited the U.S. This year visits are being planned for USAF
C/S Jones to Yugoslavia and Yugoslav DefMin Ljubicic and Army
C/S Potocar to the U.S. These visits afford opportunities to instill
confidence in U.S. strength and intentions and to develop personal
relationships between the leaders of the respective defense establish-
ments. In addition, from the Yugoslav side, the sales question is always
high on the discussion list, and thereby has become an important
element of the confidence equation.
the GOY has turned alternately to East and West for its military equip-
ment and training. After the massive U.S. grant military assistance
program of the 1950’s, the GOY chose not to renew the assistance
agreement. Once again the Soviets became Yugoslavia’s main foreign
military supply source. It still is, although the GOY has built a domestic
military industry providing the JNA with between 65 and 85 percent
of its military needs. However, after the Soviet invasion of Czechoslova-
kia in 1968 the GOY started looking beyond the USSR toward Western
Europe and the U.S. for other foreign sources. A sore point with the
U.S. has been the GOY’s desire for equipment of sensitive (and often
classified) technology and the USG’s reluctance to provide this sort of
equipment to the Yugoslavs. However, USG policy decisions in the
last few years, the most recent in 1977 by President Carter, have encour-
aged a modest sales program increase including the consideration of
sophisticated equipment on a case-by-case basis. Nevertheless, the only
major items on which we have been forthcoming have been those
which do not contain the latest technology. While it may take years to
reduce the Yugoslav dependence on the USSR in many areas, this is
a Yugoslav goal, and we, together with other Western nations, should
do what we can to assist. Consequently, we have recommended that
a policy decision be taken to free at least one major item of Yugoslav
interest. Up to now the totality of turndowns on sophisticated equip-
ment must evoke a sorry image in the Yugoslav view. To alter this
impression we must demonstrate that we are more than willing to
support a qualitative change in the relationship.
Consular:
19. A continuing source of concern in the area of Consular relations
is the absence of agreement concerning U.S. access to detained Ameri-
cans who are dual nationals. In 1972 the Embassy attempted to negotiate
an agreement, in the spirit of Article 36 of the Vienna Convention,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
which would guarantee Consular access to American citizens who are
also considered to be Yugoslav citizens. The GOY turned the U.S.
proposal down primarily for two reasons: (1) Yugoslav citizenship and
nationality laws do not permit foreign Consular access to Yugoslav
citizens who happen to have another nationality; and (2) if such an
agreement were signed other countries (Canada, Australia, France, etc)
would demand the same arrangement. In 1974 the GOY circulated a
so-called pro memoria to all diplomatic missions in which it declared
that such agreements would be “contrary to the constitutional principle
of the equality of Yugoslav citizens before the law. . .” The GOY did
promise to “take into account” the fact that a person detained also
possessed another nationality.
20. In the Embassy’s view, only a carefully drawn and executed
agreement on receiving-state responsibilities regarding notification and
access in the case of limitation of personal freedom of sending-state
nationals will assure the interests of both governments in this trouble-
some and potentially poisonous area of our Consular relations. Cases
of this nature continue to arise, straining our otherwise good relations,
and efforts should now be made to remove this problem area in the
near future.
Cultural and Informational Activities:
21. Culturalandinformationprogramshavealsoplayedamajorrole
in the development of bilateral relations. Exchange activities, particu-
larly the Fulbright and International Visitors programs, strengthen ties
between the two countries. Complementing activities of the Embassy,
U.S. Information Centers (USIC) in Belgrade, Zagreb, Ljubljana, Skopje
and Sarajevo offer another means for advancing U.S. interests in Yugo-
slavia. With resident American officers, these centers provide not only
an American presence in the community, but a unique outlet in five of
the six Yugoslav Republics for American ideas.
22. As Yugoslavia enters the transitional period leading to the post-
Tito era, we can act to put the United States into a position of influence
by intensifying cultural and information contacts and exchanges, and
by expanding them into areas of the society which have been all but
untouched until now (such as the LCY, SAWPY, social scientists and
regional political groupings).
Eagleburger

Yugoslavia
250.
Telegram From the Embassy in Yugoslavia to the
Department of State1
1584. Subj: The Tito Visit in Perspective.
1. Very little that affects the future of the foreign policy of the
United States can be predicted with confidence. But (as in so many
other things), Yugoslavia is an exception to the rule. We can be abso-
lutely positive of one thing, and reasonably certain of another:
—The certainty: Despite all the evidence to the contrary, Josip Broz
Tito will not live forever. Indeed, it is unlikely that he will still be
around when the Carter administration leaves office.
—The probability: There will follow in the wake of Tito’s demise
a period of internal uncertainty and international tension in the heart
of Europe, with the ever-present danger that uncertainty will degener-
ate into civil war and tension escalate to crisis.
2. These two factors—The certainty of Tito’s death and its potential
consequences—must lie at the heart of our thinking about the substance
of our bilateral relationship. And since the Tito visit will inevitably
influence the development of that relationship, these factors are rele-
vant to the trip as well.
3. The key question is not so much what we will do when or after
Tito passes (important as that is), but what we can do beforehand to
put ourselves in a position to have as much influence as possible on
the course of events in the post-Tito period.
4. Under a worst-case scenario Tito’s death could unleash immedi-
ately, or within a reasonably short period, a clash among Yugoslav
nationalities, or a vying for power among the residual leadership, or
both, that would result in massive instability. And who could predict
with confidence what the Soviets might, under such circumstances, be
tempted, “invited,” or feel compelled to do?
5. I make no claim that these events will come to pass. Indeed,
I believe it improbable that they will. Certainly there are other less
horrendous scenarios that are more within the realm of the possible.
But some degree of uncertainty and instability, even if only of a very
temporary nature, is virtually certain. And it is during that period
of uncertainty and—if the crisis passes uneventfully—the institution-
building that will follow after, that the US can have its greatest and
Secret; Niact Immediate; Exdis. According to another copy, Eagleburger drafted and
approved the telegram. (Ibid.)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
most productive impact. But we will be in no position, at that late date,
to influence events or forestall mistakes unless we have taken full
advantage of whatever time we still have to build the bridges of under-
standing, confidence, and—most important—common interest, that
will give us meaningful access to the forces that will shape post-Tito
Yugoslavia. Those who will lead, when the old man is gone, must not
be left to feel isolated from the West, or that the Soviet Union is the
only nation whose interests must be taken into account.
6. Nor should we lose sight of the fact that the chances are relatively
good after Tito, for a slow transformation from what must now be
classed as a repressive (yet by no means highly repressive) regime.
Tito has moved Yugoslavia a long way from the Stalinist state it once
was; indeed the process of liberalization over the course of the past 30
years has been remarkable. But so long as he remains, the pace of
further improvement in the rights enjoyed by Yugoslavs—whether
human or political—will be strictly limited. He is too much a product
of his past, too much a victim of the cult of hero-worship that has
grown up around him, ever to permit much more freedom than now
exists. But the seeds have been planted, and there will be substantial
elements in the society, after Tito departs, that will want to move
toward something more akin to the realities—if not the forms—of
Western democracy. They will need support, encouragement, advice
and guidance. And we ought to be among the first to whom they turn,
out of a confidence born of the experience of having known and worked
with us in the time before Tito exited.
7. These not-so-long-term aims are far easier to describe than to
achieve. But if they make sense, then our objective ought to be to define
and implement programs that will build a web of relationships which
will create, first, a better understanding of the interests and actions of
each side, followed by growing shared interests, the loss of which
would be painful to both parties, and, eventually, access to critical
elements of the society that have thus far been largely closed to us
(e.g., the Party and the military).
8. We should, therefore, take full advantage of the opportunities
the Tito visit offers to establish that web of relationships. The work is
already well begun; the months of the Carter administration have seen
a steady improvement in our relations to a point where they are as
good as they have been since the end of World War II. The visit should
be seen as an affirmation of that progress and a commitment to its
continuance. Tito should return home convinced that the United States
is a friend, that we understand the imperatives of Yugoslavia’s peculiar
international circumstance, and support its independence and non-
alignment, even though we will sometimes disagree on the specific
positions that circumstance and Yugoslav prejudices dicate.

Yugoslavia
9. During the visit we should:
—Listen with respect to Tito’s thoughts on the world scene (we
might even learn something), give him a clear picture of what is on
our mind, and seek to influence him on specific problems where he
and Yugoslavia have significant influence, e.g., disarmament, the
Middle East, Korea. Tito rightly considers himself a world figure and
statesman and we ought to let him know we share his high opinion
of himself. President Carter’s letters have had an enormously positive
impact and he should indicate that the practice will continue.
—Recognize Yugoslavia’s role as a leader of the nonaligned and
use the opportunity of this visit to demonstrate US understanding of
the strength and importance of that movement. At the same time, we
should underline that: (a) recent shifts in U.S. policy on a number of
issues of central importance to the nonaligned warrant, even more than
before, a more positive and balanced attitude on their part toward the
United States; b) as consultation between us grows, so can there be a
growing degree of cooperation in resolving Third-World issues and in
fostering economic development.
—Give him and his advisors a sense that we are trying our best
to resolve the few bilateral issues (Krsko and ExIm guarantees) that
stand between us, while at the same time reminding them that compro-
mise is a two-way street.
10. All of the above is important in setting the stage for post-visit
progress on the development of ties that link Yugoslavia more closely
with the United States. Foremost among these is substantial room for
a mutually profitable expansion of trade and investment. The Yugo-
slavs are anxious to reduce their heavy reliance on the Soviet Union
and to compensate where they can for their serious trade imbalance
with the Common Market. They see the US as their most promising
alternative, and we should do all we can to encourage and foster a
shift in our direction.
11. Of almost equal importance, but far less amenable to easy
solution, is the development of improved U.S. defense cooperation
with Yugoslavia—particularly arms sales. Over the past several years
our sales have been virtually nonexistent; our contacts with the Yugo-
slav military (a critical element in the post-Tito transition period) only
slightly better. President Carter’s decision to permit a “modest” expan-
sion of our sales program, and Secretary Brown’s subsequent visit to
Belgrade, marked a new phase in the relationship—one which has
already led to some new sales and a marginal improvement in our
relations with the military. But the program is still plagued by bureau-
cratic inertia and distrust on both sides—factors which a successful
visit should make it easier to resolve.
12. And finally, the visit can give a major impetus to the develop-
ment of contacts between political leaders of both countries. The Repub-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
lican and Democratic National Committees have invited a delegation
of Yugoslav Communist Party leaders to visit the US later this year—
a first. But the invitation took great effort to arrange, and mutual
suspicion, I suspect, will be high. The Tito visit should make each side
more respectable in the eyes of the other, thereby encouraging the
development of a real dialogue and a continuing exchange.
13. The question of suspicion may, in the last analysis, be the real
roadblock that must be overcome if our relations are to prosper over
the longer term. Yugoslavia is led, after all, by a generation of Commu-
nists who fought a war and died for their beliefs; men who, soon
afterward, only reluctantly and after great soul-searching chose to
accept Moscow’s excommunication rather than change their ways; men
who for a long time, in their heart-of-hearts, longed to be reaccepted
into the body of the faithful (but on their own terms). And we, in
their eyes, are the bulwark of capitalism, the fortress of economic
exploitation, and the last defender of a dying colonialism.
14. Admittedly, times have changed. Unlike whichever Louis it
was, the Yugoslav leadership has learned something. But it has forgot-
ten very little. The emotional pull of the Soviets has lessened, the
growth of Eurocommunism has reduced the sense of isolation. The
United States does not post the ever-present military threat the Soviets
do; we can be used, we are generally respected and often envied, but
we are not widely trusted. In the end the saving element is that they
are all better Yugoslavs than Communists. As such, their own interests
as they perceive them will guide their decisions (which makes them
very like all the rest of us). It is our job, then, slowly to persuade them
of the community of our interests. We have made a remarkably good
start over the course of the past year; the task now is to transform a
promising beginning into a lasting success.
Eagleburger

Yugoslavia
251.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, March 3, 1978
SUBJECT
Meetings with President Tito
The memorandum from Cy Vance (Tab A)2 sets out effectively the
background, setting, and issues for your meetings with President Tito.
A suggested arrival statement and talking points for your toast are at
Tab B;3 your latest letter to Tito at Tab C;4 his latest letter to you at
Tab D;5 and Reston’s article on his interview with Tito at Tab E.6 The
Yugoslavs have also suggested issuing a joint statement at the end of
the visit, as has been customary on past Tito visits. State is currently
negotiating an appropriate statement with the Yugoslavs, which we
will forward to you before the meetings.
In your recent letter to him, you suggested discussions on East-
West relations, disarmament, the Middle East, Africa, North-South
relations, the global economy, and Tito’s trip to the Soviet Union,
China, and North Korea. We have not yet had a response to your letter
soliciting his comments on this proposed agenda, but will send it to
you immediately if and when it arrives.
The Yugoslavs have made clear that Tito will want to talk about
major issues with you, preferably leaving bilateral issues to discussions
date is handwritten.
2 See Document 252.
3 Attached but not printed. For the remarks at the welcoming ceremony and the
4 Attached but not printed; dated February 24. In the letter, Carter proposed an
agenda for discussions including East-West relations, arms control and disarmament,
the Middle East, Africa, North-South relations, and global economic issues as well as
any other reflections Tito might have on his recent trip to the Soviet Union, China,
and North Korea. Carter also expressed support for achieving “a substantial and well-
balanced document” at the conclusion of the CSCE meeting in Belgrade. (Carter Library,
National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Country Chron
5 Attached but not printed. In the undated letter, sent February 12, Tito addressed
the Palestinian issue, the Horn of Africa, and the CSCE conference in Belgrade. He
also stressed his belief of the importance of adopting a substantial and comprehensive
document at the conclusion of the Belgrade CSCE conference. (Ibid.)
6 James Reston, “At 85, Tito Still Looks to Future and Worries About the Present.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
at the ministerial level. However, he may raise with you the question
of the Krsko reactor.7
The Yugoslavs have repeatedly said that the exchange of letters
between you and President Tito have deeply impressed him, and it is
clear they have done a lot to improve relations between our two coun-
tries. The Yugoslavs were particularly struck that in a recent letter you
praised Tito’s leadership of the non-aligned movement,8 something no
U.S. Administration had done before.
In your most recent exchange of letters, you discussed the Middle
East, the Horn of Africa and CSCE. His reply (tabbed in the book) was
only generalon thefirst twoissues, but soughtyour assistancein moving
Belgrade to a successful conclusion, an appeal he also addressed—
unsuccessfully—to Brezhnev. (Your response is also tabbed in the book,
and you may wish to refer to it.)
Issues
In addition to material in the State Department book, there are the
following issues:
Krsko. The basic issue is well set out in Cy’s memo: as part of our
own non-proliferation program and in accord with the Act, we seek
commitments from the Yugoslavs about disposition of U.S.-supplied
equipment and fuel—commitments additional to the original Yugoslav
agreement with the IAEA. We offered a package which would meet
our requirements, and negotiations seemed to be going well. However,
tion with Malivoj Maksic, Tito’s National Security Adviser, in which the two discussed
how the meetings between the two Presidents should be organized, and whether the
Foreign Ministers would participate in the meetings with the Presidents or have parallel
meetings. Eagleburger concluded: “Tito clearly prefers to focus on international problems,
leaving bilateral issues to others.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
his February 25 meeting with Maksic, in which the Yugoslav official stressed Tito’s
desire for private meetings with Carter and informed Eagleburger that Tito would not
get into details on bilateral matters, but would concentrate on international issues such
as détente, CSCE, disarmament, the Middle East, China, North Korea, and the Non-
Aligned Movement. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780088–
0200)
8 In his January 31 letter, Carter discussed the deteriorating situation in the Horn
of Africa due to increased Soviet and Cuban involvement in the area. Carter asked Tito
to use his influence in the Non-Aligned Movement and his good offices to convince the
Ethiopian Government of the need for a negotiated settlement. He also asked Tito to
convey to the Soviet Government the growing U.S. unease about Soviet and Cuban
involvement in the Horn. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material,
President’s Correspondence with Foreign Leaders File, Box 21, Yugoslavia: President

Yugoslavia
this week at the IAEA the Yugoslavs called our proposals unacceptable
and said Tito would ask you for a “waiver.”9
—If Tito raises the issue in a general way, I suggest you applaud
the Yugoslav record on non-proliferation; explain our concerns and
legislation, thus making clear that we are not discriminating against
Yugoslavia; express appreciation for their willingness to negotiate and
that you look forward to a successful conclusion.
—If Tito asks for a waiver, this is the situation: the Non-Prolifera-
tion Act contains no “waiver” permitting you to authorize shipments
of fuel to a country that does not meet the immediate conditions of
the Act. There is, however, a theoretical loophole which gives EURA-
TOM and the IAEA two years to meet the immediate conditions of the
Act. Since Yugoslavia’s agreement is with the IAEA, that might be
made to apply. But to use that loophole for Yugoslavia would create an
impression that the Act is being dismantled as soon as it was signed. And
it would put you in confrontation with the NRC, which is strongly
opposed and feels that Yugoslavia supply agreement with us should
not be through the IAEA in the first place. If Tito asks for a waiver, I
suggest you explain that there is no waiver provision in the act that
would apply, point out the effect on our entire non-proliferation pro-
gram, and suggest that Vance discuss the question with Foreign Minis-
ter Minic.
Science and Technology Cooperation. During the past five years, we
have had a science and technology cooperation program with the Yugo-
slavs, to which each side committed $7 million over that period. Our
part has been financed out of our dinar holdings, which will not con-
tinue to be large enough to finance this program, in addition to the
usual expenses of our Embassy in Belgrade.
The Yugoslavs have proposed, therefore, that we begin paying
Yugoslav annuitants (from Social Security, etc.) in dollars instead of
dinars, in order to free up extra dinars for the science and technology
program. Treasury objects, on the grounds that that will swell the pool
of dinars to excess, and that the proposal falls outside the intent of
Congress, if not the law itself governing U.S.-owned foreign currencies.
I have asked State-Treasury-OMB to propose an alternative—such
as a direct appropriation of approximately $1.5 million a year to this
team at the IAEA held that the United States should reacquire the spent fuel from
Yugoslavia’s Krsko reactor. The Yugoslavs, the Embassy reported, told the IAEA that
Tito would raise the matter with Carter. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
Policy File, D780095–1047)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
program, which the Yugoslavs value highly. As soon as I have their
proposal, I shall forward it to you for approval.10
Demonstrations. As you know, the Yugoslavs are very much con-
cerned about the prospect of demonstrations during Tito’s visit. Two
permits have been granted: one to a small group of Serbs, and another
to a larger group of Croats. Justice and State continue to work on the
problem, but at time of writing no way had been found to shift the
demonstrations from in front of the White House. I will continue to
pursue this issue; in any event, everyone is on notice that there can be
no repeat of the incident when the Shah was here.
North Korea. The Yugoslavs have reported that President Tito con-
tinues to be interested in a possible role as go-between us and Pyong-
yang. In addition to the material in Cy’s memo, I believe you should
know that:
—North Korean intransigence is responsible for the current diplo-
matic impasse. It is Pyongyang that maintains it is the “only legal
sovereign government” on the Peninsula, insists that its friends and
allies foreswear all contact with Seoul, rejects a renewal of serious,
substantive discussions with the Republic of Korea, and refuses to
contemplate the wider involvement of both Koreas in the international
community through dual membership in the UN on a provisional basis,
pending progress toward reunification.
—Pyongyang’s position is increasingly out of phase with interna-
tional realities. More than 50 countries recognize both Koreas—54 to
be exact. Both Koreas sit alongside each other in a growing number of
UN Specialized Agencies, despite the North’s refusal to countenance
dual membership in the UN itself. Though Pyongyang seeks to keep
alive the fiction that South Korea is illegitimate, it must come to terms
with the fact that the ROK is not merely a going concern, but has
become a major world trading power which in a few years time will
qualify for membership in the OECD on the basis of its industrial
prowess.
—Some of the Communist countries—most notably the East Ger-
mans—have apparently acknowledged that any long-term movement
toward reunification must progress through a prolonged period of
10 In a March 6 memorandum to Carter, Brzezinski informed the President that
OMB, the Department of the Treasury, and the Department of State disagreed on the
possible way forward for the Science and Technology program. While OMB recom-
mended allowing the various agencies to seek funding based on their own priorities,
the Department of State recommended seeking a $7 million appropriation to fund the
program for another five years, an option Brzezinski also supported. Carter approved
the appropriation, noting in the margin that it should be a “regular budget item—no
special budget request.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material,

Yugoslavia
“peaceful coexistence” in which North-South relations are institutional-
ized and regularized, i.e., the German formula.” This is a salutary
development. Others should chime in, Tito included.
—Yugoslavia’s position is itself somewhat curious. Belgrade wishes
to assume the role of go-between. Yet it has not carved out a policy
toward Korea that reflects the dominant movement toward interna-
tional recognition of the reality of two Koreas.
I recommend, therefore, that you emphasize the following points:
—Our belief that North Korea’s diplomatic stance is increasingly
anachronistic.
—We are serious about implementing our troop withdrawal plan,
but have no intention of responding to North Korean suggestions to
discuss the Korean problems in forums which exclude the South. Our
attitude toward contacts with Pyongyang will depend on the willing-
ness of its allies to make reciprocal contacts with Seoul.
—Our conviction that a prolonged period of institutionalized
peaceful coexistence is the only plausible route toward reunification.
In that context the diplomatic objective should be the reduction of
tensions between the two Koreas and a resumption of the North-
South dialogue.
—Ask whether Honnecker’s veiled suggestions in Pyongyang that
the North consider a two-Koreas policy comparable to arrangements
worked out by the two Germanys reflects Soviet thinking on this sub-
ject. Inquire about North Korean reactions to Honnecker’s proposals.
—The Yugoslav policy of shunning direct commercial relations
with Seoul appears to be inconsistent with the diversification of
relations by South and North Korea which Tito has asked us to accept.
Post-Tito Contingencies. The Four-Power Political Directors have
been working for some time on a general contingency paper in the
event of Soviet pressure following Tito’s death. This paper seeks to
identify the military supply needs of the Yugoslav military—for several
contingencies—and Western ability to provide those supplies. It also
surveys diplomatic efforts that could be made in support of Yugoslavia
under those circumstances. The paper does not contemplate any form
of direct Western military involvement. It will be discussed at the next
Four-Power Foreign Ministers’ meeting, but this will not lead to any
joint commitments, nor has the paper been discussed in any way with
other countries, including Yugoslavia.
Overflight. Last week, there was another overflight incident, when
four U.S. aircraft from Italy briefly violated Yugoslav airspace. We
have no indications that the Yugoslavs detected the violation; but the

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
State Department has informed the Yugoslav Ambassador about it.11
You will recall that we were falsely accused of overflights last fall, but
dealt successfully with the incident by sending a senior Admiral to
Yugoslavia to compare technical data, and by showing our deep con-
cern. There is now an “informal” procedure—to avoid setting a prece-
dent that could cause problems during a succession crisis—by which
we let the Yugoslavs know when there will be naval air activity in
the Adriatic.
Economic Cooperation. In his Reston interview (not in the part carried
in the Times), Tito emphasized economic cooperation with us. In the
last week, we have agreed with the Yugoslavs to set up two working
groups, at the Deputy Assistant Secretary/Ambassador level, on eco-
nomic cooperation—one group in Belgrade and one here. This will be
announced in the joint statement at the end of the visit.
Kardelj. You may want to recall the visit of Mr. Kardelj last fall. At
the moment, he is very seriously ill (cancer, reportedly), and you may
want to inquire after him.
Detente. The Yugoslavs repeatedly say that detente between the
U.S. and Soviet Union has possibilities of condominium, unless broad-
ened to include “smaller powers”—i.e., Yugoslavia. You might go into
Yugoslavia’s role (and that of other smaller powers) in CSCE, areas
like diplomacy on the Horn, Tito’s role in dealing with both East and
West, and his leadership of the non-aligned movement.
Horn of Africa. We would welcome more Yugoslav initiative on the
Horn of Africa. We hope the Yugoslavs can capitalize on the relation-
ships they have in Addis Ababa, a) to influence Mengistu’s government
to pursue a more balanced and more truly non-aligned policy; and b)
to cooperate in a settlement with the Somalis which will preserve
Ethiopia’s territorial integrity—but at the same time avoid needless
humiliation of the Somalis. If an Ethiopian-Somali settlement is to last,
some arrangement for a broader ceasefire policing operation appears
to us to be needed. It would be best to have this set up under OAU
auspices; but if the OAU finds it difficult to work out arrangements,
we would like to see more experienced countries—such as Yugoslavia
and India—offering their help and serving as catalysts.
China. You may wish to explore with President Tito the possibility
of his acting as a channel to Peking, much as the Romanians were used
at an earlier stage:
jet had unintentionally penetrated Yugoslav airspace earlier that day. Vest assured Belov-
ski that the airplane had been grounded and its equipment was being checked, and that
the United States took the incident very seriously. (Telegram 52219 to Belgrade, March

Yugoslavia
—We are pleased to see the developing relationship between
Peking and Belgrade. We think this is an important relationship and
one that deserves to be broadened.
—We are committed to the process of normalization and would
consider it useful if Tito could convey the earnestness of our intent
to Peking.
—We consider the improvement of our relations with Peking to
be a matter of historic and strategic importance.
—We believe that mutual efforts are necessary to create the envi-
ronment in which the normalization process can be completed. Such
mutual efforts include not only an expansion of the commercial and
economic relations with Peking in order to foster political attitudes in
this country that would favor normalization, but a broadening and
deepening of our consultations with Peking about world affairs as well.
—To this end, perhaps Tito could indicate to the Chinese that we
do not wish to use our relationship with Peking to get at the Russians.
We do not seek to manipulate the Sino-Soviet dispute to our advantage.
Rather, we believe that an improved relationship with Peking is simply
in the American interest.
—But to convince our domestic skeptics that an improved relation-
ship with Peking is in our interest, perhaps Tito would be willing to
indicate to the Chinese that it would be helpful to us were the Chinese
to discuss with us rather than preach to us on such issues as:
—Korea and the possibility of cooperative measures to promote a
peaceful and just evolution of the situation on the Peninsula.
—Africa and ways in which we might pursue separate yet reinforc-
ing ways of preventing outside powers from establishing positions of
dominance on the Continent.
—Global strategic matters and ways in which US efforts to promote
arms control and disarmament can take into account the Chinese posi-
tion and encourage the Chinese to participate in our efforts.
—In short, we see China as a significant actor on the world scene,
we consider that we have many parallel strategic interests with China,
and we wish to act upon these parallel interests in order over a period
of time to encourage the Chinese to play a constructive role in the
addressing of man’s many problems.
Non-Aligned Movement. President Tito will want to talk with you
about the Non-Aligned Movement. It would be useful to seek his
moderating influence on a particular question—the next meeting of
the Movement in Havana in 1979, when Cuba wants a signal success:
—Historically, the position of the US Government to the Non-
Aligned Movement has been one of distance at best, and hostility
at worst.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
—We may not like Non-Aligned criticism of the United States, but
we recognize that, in the long term, an independent movement of non-
aligned states which view the world differently from both the United
States and the Soviet Union, is in our interest. Therefore, we hope to
communicate on a regular basis with the Movement.
—Since we now have an interest in an independent, non-aligned
movement, we are concerned that the next Chairman of the Movement
is Cuba, a country which is so closely aligned to the Soviet Union.
Indeed, Cuban troops are presently being used to further Soviet goals
in Africa and may even be taking orders from Soviet military offi-
cials there.
—In discussions of “imperialism” at the next Non-Aligned confer-
ence in 1979, we wonder whether Cuban and Soviet imperialism will
be discussed with as much vigor—if at all—as “U.S. imperialism.”
Welcoming Ceremony. It will be televised live to Yugoslavia, in six
languages.
First Meeting. Tito has indicated he would like to meet alone with
you at the start of the first meeting (Oval Office). No subjects have
been advanced.
Security: Update. Friday night, the Yugoslav Consulate in San Fran-
cisco was fire-bombed. Warren Christopher talked with the Yugoslav
Ambassador to note that the FBI is vigorously investigating it, and that
we are acting to protect other Yugoslav installations—though so far
only through the local police.

Yugoslavia
252.
Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance to
President Carter1
Washington, undated
SUBJECT
State Visit to the United States by President Josip Broz Tito of Yugoslavia,
I. OBJECTIVES
President Tito is paying his third visit to the United States—proba-
bly his last. Our objectives are to honor him as one of the towering
figures of his era; to build stronger and broader ties with Yugoslavia
which will carry us through the post-Tito transition period; to discuss
a wide range of global issues in hopes of reaching closer understanding;
to discuss a few bilateral issues in hopes of resolving them. There are
no crises in our relationship at present.
During the talks, we should reaffirm our steadfast support for
Yugoslavia’s independence from Soviet domination and for its unity
and territorial integrity. We should indicate that we respect Yugo-
slavia’s policy of nonalignment and Tito as a founder of that movement.
We should also encourage further the process of bilateral consultations
at the highest level as well as more active contacts at every level.
Tito will want to discuss mainly global issues: East-West relations,
detente, the Belgrade CSCE meeting, disarmament, Eurocommunism,
nonalignment and world economic issues. He will also wish to discuss
the Middle East, the Horn of Africa, China, Korea, and perhaps other
world trouble spots. On bilateral matters, he may raise the nuclear
fuel export license for Krsko (KERSH-ko) power station, ExIm Bank
financing, bilateral military exchanges including progress in our new
arms transfer relationship.
II. SETTING
Defying generalization, Yugoslavia is Balkan, Mediterranean and
Middle European in essence; with a history going back through the
Roman era but a state only in this century; Roman Catholic, Orthodox
and Moslem; bearing the marks of both the Turkish and Austro-Hun-
garian Empires, as well as indigenous kings and despots; a contempo-
underlined scattered words and phrases throughout the memorandum. The memoran-
dum was attached as Tab A to Brzezinski’s March 3 memorandum; see Document 251.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
rary state poised strategically and politically between East and West,
and playing a world role far beyond what size or power would dictate.
Site of the spark that ignited the First World War, Yugoslavia arose
out of that war as a state welded—or patched—together from pieces
of the Kingdom of Serbia, of the crumbled Turkish Empire and of
defeated Austria-Hungary. Little more than twenty years later it fell
victim to German and Italian invasion, and was torn by Civil War
between the communist-led Partisans under Tito, the Mihailovic forces
built from remnants of the pre-war regime and the Ustashi forces in
the Nazi puppet “Independent State of Croatia”. In vicious and tragic
fighting against the occupiers and each other almost 2 million Yugoslav
lives were lost—about half at the hands of other Yugoslavs.
Marshal Tito came out of the war an authentic national hero, able
to form in Yugoslavia the only post-war communist regime in Europe
not imposed by Soviet arms or subversion. But, good communist that
he was, Tito worked closely with Moscow until forced to demonstrate
that he was an even better nationalist. The historic break with the
Soviets in 1948–49 has profoundly affected Yugoslavia’s course for the
30 years that have followed.
An outcast in the communist world after 1949, and threatened by
Soviet power, Yugoslavia found the United States prepared to support
its independence with military and economic assistance programs total-
embarked on policies which have largely formed today’s Yugoslavia
and which explain its importance as a country. Internally, he set in
train political and economic trends which have made Yugoslavia a
maverick in communist theory and practice. While still a one-party
state, Yugoslavia no longer comes close to the totalitarian communist
stereotype of a highly centralized system characterized by virtually
total suppression of individual rights. Externally, Tito joined with
India’s Nehru and Egypt’s Nasser to create the nonaligned movement,
thereby giving focus to the growing number of newly-independent
and underdeveloped states seeking a voice in the post-war world. Sole
survivor of the three and, by now, the only remaining national leader
of the Second World War generation, Tito stands as an elder statesman
and leader of the nonaligned and the third world.
The economy—and the underlying economic philosophy—start
from premises which are unorthodox in communist practice. Unlike
the rest of communist Europe, industrial property is not state-owned
or managed via a government bureaucracy. Rather, industrial and
economic activity is carried on through a “workers’ self management”
system which at least in theory places ownership of enterprises in the
hands of those who work in them (except in agriculture, a percentage
of which is in private hands, and in retail marketing and small manufac-

Yugoslavia
turing, some of which is privately-owned). These enterprises operate
under a broad economic policy and planning mandate, but with sub-
stantial independent management authority which they share with
the workers’ self-management organs (having a voice in selection of
managers, production, investment and wage policy) within each enter-
prise. This unique system, coupled with Eastern Europe’s only real
banking system and active participation in international markets, has
given Yugoslavia a dynamic industrial quasi-market (albeit somewhat
inefficient) economy which is, in many respects, far removed from the
statist economies of its Eastern European neighbors.
As a self-proclaimed leader of the nonaligned movement, Yugo-
slavia participates actively in a host of international bodies and often
seeks the role of spokesman or mediator on issues which concern the
nonaligned and the third world. Yugoslav positions on most interna-
tional questions reflect both the leadership’s philosophical proclivities
and their sense of what will reinforce Yugoslavia’s position in the
nonaligned movement. While these motivations more often than not
lead Yugoslavia to positions different from ours, there have been some
recent signs of a tendency to play a moderating role between opposing
positions, such as the Middle East and the Horn of Africa. This is
illustrated in Yugoslavia’s recent actions on Middle East developments.
Without dropping their long-standing support for the Arabs, the Yugo-
slavs have moved significantly to express openly the view that the
existence of Israel must be accepted and assured. Tito has recently lent
his personal prestige to this position in messages to Arab leaders.
In the contemporary dynamics of today’s world, with East-West
issues at the surface at the CSCE in Belgrade, with Eurocommunism
near the surface in Western Europe, and with an array of issues facing us
all in the Middle East, Africa and elsewhere, Yugoslavia will inevitably
retain an importance and, thus, have an interest to the United States
well beyond its nominal place in the world.
Whether Yugoslavia’s importance will survive Tito’s departure
from the scene—a prospect which must be considered despite his
remarkable longevity—will depend on both internal and external
forces. Yugoslavia’s leaders have had to contend with nationalist strains
among the ethnic and religious groupings, as well as with wide dispari-
ties among the republics in economic development. Tito’s passing will
remove the greatest single symbol of national unity and could threaten
the nation’s stability. It is difficult to predict what the Soviets might
be tempted to do in such a situation in the interests of bringing Yugo-
slavia back into communist conformity. Clearly the Yugoslavs are
totally committed to preserving their independence. Equally clearly,
their leaders are aware of the risk of Soviet interference, and believe
that Western interest, engagement and commitment to Yugoslav inde-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
pendence could be their best insurance against Soviet meddling in a
time of transition.
In this context, a stable structure of U.S.-Yugoslav relations in the
present may well help to insure a future which the Yugoslavs desire
and which would serve our interests.
III. KEY ISSUES
1. Bilateral Relations
U.S. Objectives: To convince President Tito that the US supports
Yugoslav independence from Soviet domination; that we seek a cordial
relationship with Yugoslavia; that we are interested in Yugoslavia’s
economic well being; and that we are prepared to continue expansion,
consistent with PD–13, or our military sales relationship.
Yugoslav Objectives: To indicate that Yugoslavia is trustworthy and
sincere in its dealings with the US; that it maintains a balanced foreign
policy through its commitment to nonalignment; and that Yugoslavia
firmly desires to avoid economic or military dependence on the
Soviet bloc.
Essential Factors:
Bilateral relations have improved significantly in the past year with
the visits to Belgrade by the Vice President and the Secretary of Defense,
and to Washington by Kardelj. We seek to continue this process by
developing ties which will survive the post-Tito transition. The Yugo-
slavs are quite willing to credit your Administration for this new rela-
tionship; they see in Washington a policy and a view which are more
open, relaxed, confident and tolerant of the views of others.
US-Yugoslav economic relations have generally been good in recent
years. Two-way trade has expanded to almost $700 million, and the
US is Yugoslav’s fourth largest trade partner (after the USSR, the FRG
and Italy). Yugoslav exports to the US enjoy either MFN or preferential
(GSP) tariff treatment. American investment in Yugoslavia—the first
Communist nation to welcome foreign capital—has grown to about
$150 million and there are now some 20 joint ventures, including a
$750 million petro-chemical complex being built jointly by Dow Chemi-
cal Co. and its Yugoslav partner. Yugoslavia wants to expand trade
with the US, in part because of its very large trade deficit with the
EEC, in part because the Soviet Union’s share of its total trade has grown
uncomfortably high. Recently, a dispute over Yugoslav guarantees
for ExImBank loans threatens to maim ExIm’s important loan and
guarantee program which has stimulated US firms to invest in Yugo-
slavia’s economy. This dispute is still being negotiated by ExIm Chair-
man Moore, bearing in mind Yugoslav laws and ExIm’s needs.

Yugoslavia
Since Secretary Brown’s visit to Belgrade in October, our arms sales
have expanded markedly although the total figure remains relatively
small. FMS sales for FY 78 could reach $10 million or a little more
compared to $267 thousand in FY 77. While various items are still
being reviewed, six Yugoslav requests for advanced or sensitive weap-
ons have been denied. The Yugoslavs have expressed disappointment
that we refuse to sell them high technology or to provide data on
weapons still being developed.
Points to be Made:
—We welcome the improvement in relations which has occurred
over the past year and we seek further ways to strengthen ties.
—The exchange of letters and briefings in recent months has been
helpful and we value Tito’s views.
—We look forward to more active exchanges across the spectrum
of our relationship, including visits to the U.S. by Yugoslav legislative
representatives and political leaders.
—We continue, as in the past, to support Yugoslavia’s independ-
ence, unity and territorial integrity, and we respect its commitment to
non-alignment.
—We strongly support the expansion of U.S. trade and investment
ties with Yugoslavia.
—On the Exim guarantee problem (if Tito raises), assure him that
Chairman Moore is anxious to solve the problem, as indicated by the
flexibility he has displayed, and suggest that discussions be resumed
as soon as possible so that this issue does not affect our excellent
trade relations.
—We welcome the establishment of a bilateral working group
(below the Cabinet level) to discuss the whole range of economic ques-
tions on a regular basis.
—We are pleased with the expanded cooperation in military sales
and feel that it reflects the improvement in overall relations between
our two countries.
—Since the visits of Secretary Brown and General Cemalovic, arms
transfers have increased significantly, and we expect this encouraging
trend to continue. As a result of these meetings and the following
discussions between technical experts of both countries, several
advanced weapons systems have been offered to and accepted by
Yugoslavia.
(If they raise the question of denial of certain high technology
systems):
—There are obvious constraints on both countries in this relation-
ship, but the important thing to emphasize is the progress we have
made and to work for improvement.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
—We have offered several first line systems to Yugoslavia, and
the denials were not discriminatory, given restraints we have placed
on arms transfers.
2. Terrorism
U.S. Objectives: To seek to minimize the impact of anti-Yugoslav
emigre activity on our bilateral relationship; to affirm publicly and
privately that the U.S. supports neither the methods nor the goals of
anti-Yugoslav terrorists; to gain Yugoslav support for effective interna-
tional measures to eliminate terrorism in all forms.
Yugoslav Objectives: To urge more effective U.S. action to prevent
anti-Yugoslav acts by emigre terrorists and to prosecute those
responsible.
Essential Factors: The activities of anti-Yugoslav emigres in the U.S.
have bedevilled our relations for years, and the prospect of massive
demonstrations against Tito could seriously undermine whatever gains
derive from the visit. The number and seriousness of anti-Yugoslav
acts over the past two years are alarming, but in two cases the perpretra-
tors were convicted and given stiff sentences. On the international
level, Yugoslavia acknowledges the seriousness of the problem but has
been reluctant to break stride with the nonaligned majority and the
radical Arabs by agreeing to tough measures.
Points to be Made:
—We support neither the separatist goals nor the terrorist means
of anti-Yugoslav extremists.
—(if necessary) We deeply regret the presence of demonstrators
during this visit, but urge that their importance not be exaggerated.
We have a highly diverse population, and the “anti” voices often ring
loudest. But the vast majority of Americans support good relations
with Yugoslavia and feel great respect for President Tito.
—We are actively concerned about the number and seriousness of
anti-Yugoslav incidents in this country and will make every effort to
catch the perpetrators.
—The seriousness of this issue on the international level requires
effective action by the entire world community without regard to the
alleged motives of the terrorists.
—Our position is not politically motivated; we oppose terrorism
in all forms and for whatever alleged purposes.
—We seek Yugoslav support for effective UN action to suppress
international terrorism.
3. Nuclear Non-proliferation and the Krsko Fuel License
U.S. Objectives: To convince Tito that our efforts to obtain additional
assurances covering the export of fuel for the Krsko (KERSH-ko) reactor

Yugoslavia
do not discriminate against Yugoslavia; to seek Tito’s support for our
non-proliferation objectives.
Yugoslav Objectives: To ensure that Yugoslavia’s access to nuclear
technology is not restricted by the nuclear “have” nations and to urge
prompt approval for the Krsko fuel export license.
Essential Factors: The IAEA Agreements under which the U.S.
agreed in 1974 to supply Yugoslavia with a reactor and fuel for the
Krsko Nuclear Power Station do not meet all the criteria contained in
the legislation on nuclear exports, specifically, US approval rights over
retransfer and reprocessing of US-supplied equipment, US supplied
fuel, and non-US fuel used in the Krsko reactor. We have therefore
been seeking these additional U.S. approval rights. The Yugoslavs, who
are adherents to the NPT and cooperating members of the IAEA, have
indicated their willingness to accept universally applicable safeguards
and controls which result from new international agreements, but they
have resisted what they regard as unilateral U.S. attempts to impose
discriminatory conditions on existing arrangements. They have also
said that they are unwilling to “tie their hands” with regard to a future
option to reprocess. (We are aware of no current Yugoslav plans to
recycle or reprocess.) In May 1977 we approved the export of the
Westinghouse reactor,2 in order not to delay the Krsko project, on
the basis of Yugoslav commitments not to retransfer U.S.-supplied
equipment and to negotiate the disposition of spent fuel. Following
two rounds of negotiations, we appear to be close to agreement on
additional assurances covering U.S.-supplied fuel and on a Yugoslav
commitment to continue to negotiate on any non-U.S. fuel used in
Krsko. (We believe that such an arrangement would result in NRC
approval of the pending fuel license.) Since Tito has been personally
involved in this issue, final Yugoslav agreement will depend on his
approval.
Points to be Made:
—Place Krsko in the broader context of U.S. international policies
on disarmament and non-proliferation, and note that U.S. and Yugoslav
objectives on non-proliferation are virtually identical.
—Note that our non-proliferation policies are not discriminatory
and that we are not asking more from Yugoslavia than from other
countries.
2 The Nuclear Regulatory Commission approved the export license application for

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
—Praise the spirit of cooperation shown by the Yugoslav side
during the recent negotiations.
—Indicate that our negotiations appear to be close to mutually
satisfactory resolution which should provide more than adequate time
for the first shipment of fuel to be exported this autumn.
4. East-West Relations and Europe: CSCE, U.S.-Soviet Relations,
SALT, Eurocommunism, (MBFR)
U.S. Objectives: To assure Tito that we continue to pursue detente
and meaningful arms restraints with the Soviet Union; that we support
the CSCE process and the improvement of East-West relations; to
explain our policy on Eurocommunism.
Yugoslav Objectives: To argue for more understanding and accom-
modation between the U.S. and USSR, particularly on disarmament
issues, with the goal of reducing bloc confrontation in Europe; to urge
greater U.S. tolerance for West European communist parties.
Essential Factors: Politically and strategically balanced between East
and West, Yugoslavia is a potential victim of any great-power confron-
tation, and therefore seeks to keep both superpowers at arms length.
But it sees itself as a potential bridge of understanding and its impor-
tance grows in times of lower tension. In the longer view, the Yugoslavs
may envisage for themselves a pace-setting role in a restructured
Europe without “blocs,” in which communists have a more prominent
role in the West and dissent and diversity are more broadly tolerated
in the East.
Points to be Made:
—We recognize and appreciate the great efforts which Yugoslavia,
and Tito personally, made in hosting the Belgrade CSCE meeting. We
understand Yugoslavia’s disappointment at the outcome, and regret
that the consistent efforts by both of our delegations could not produce
a substantive concluding document. We believe, however, that the
Belgrade meeting has been a success and that its results will benefit
detente.
—While we do not seek confrontation with the Soviets or others,
we feel that all aspects of the Helsinki Final Act, including human
rights questions, are legitimate subjects for international discussion.
We are pleased that our two delegations were able to work so closely
together in Belgrade.
—U.S.-Soviet relations continue to represent a mixture of competi-
tion and cooperation. We seek a SALT II Agreement which is fair to
both sides, and are pleased with the progress on other arms control
questions (e.g., Comprehensive Test Ban). Our goal is the actual reduc-
tion of nuclear weapons and their eventual abolition.

Yugoslavia
—On MBFR (if Tito raises), we and our allies want to see progress
toward reducing the opposing forces in Central Europe; any agreement
should enhance political and military stability in Europe, and should
be equitable; we will continue to keep Yugoslavia informed about the
progress of the Vienna Talks.
—On Eurocommunism, as we have said many times, we will not
interfere in the domestic electoral processes in this matter. We do
have certain concerns, however, about the possibility that communist
participation in Western governments could weaken Western unity
and harm the European balance.
5. Multilateral Political Issues: Nonalignment, UN Special Session on
Disarmament, Puerto Rico
U.S. Objectives: To voice understanding and respect for Yugo-
slavia’s policy of nonalignment; to encourage the Yugoslavs to take U.S.
views into account as they develop their own positions on multilateral
issues; to avoid unnecessary irritations on matters of importance to us
(e.g., Puerto Rico); to endorse the UN Special Session on Disarmament.
Yugoslav Objectives: To convince us that nonalignment makes sense
for Yugoslavia and many other countries; that the success of the move-
ment does not harm U.S. interests; to urge that we consult more actively
with the nonaligned in our own policy deliberations.
Essential Factors: Nonalignment is a fundamental component of
Yugoslav foreign policy and is regarded as indispensable to preserving
Yugoslavia’s independence and world status. The Yugoslavs feel that
the U.S. has previously been either indifferent or hostile to the move-
ment, but they see in your Administration’s approach to Third World
issues a welcome shift toward greater understanding for nonaligned
views. Meanwhile the movement itself is showing signs of strain under
the pressure of radicals within the movement and open conflicts
between member nations. Yugoslavia seeks to maintain internal cohe-
sion within the movement and to remain in the mainstream. Belgrade
is hosting the Nonaligned Foreign Ministers meeting this summer in
preparation for the 1979 Nonaligned Summit in Havana, and is appar-
ently working with others to maintain the relatively constructive and
non-confrontational stance adopted at the Colombo summit in 1976.
The UN Special Session on Disarmament next June was largely a Yugo-
slav initiative which we supported. As President of the last regular
General Assembly, the Yugoslav Deputy Foreign Minister will preside
at the Special Session. On Puerto Rico, we sought an affirmative Yugo-
slav vote on the most recent motion in the UN Decolonization Commit-
tee to defer the question of Puerto Rico for another year, but the Yugo-
slavs abstained, as they did in the previous two years.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
Points to be Made:
—We respect Yugoslavia’s policy of nonalignment, and seek the
views of the nonaligned on matters of mutual interest.
—We look forward to bilateral consultations on multilateral mat-
ters, including the Special Session of Disarmament, and we will make
a strong and positive contribution to the success of the session.
—In the spirit of our improving relationships, we should both
avoid actions which cause difficulty for the other. In this connection,
the status of Puerto Rico is a United States domestic question and
we hope that Yugoslavia will use its influence within the nonaligned
movement and in other multilateral fora to see that it is not discussed
as an international question.3
6. International Economic Issues, North-South Dialogue
U.S. Objectives: To assure President Tito that we welcome a positive
North/South dialogue, including the negotiation of key economic
issues in appropriate functional fora and the discussion of global rela-
tionships in the new UNGA Committee of the Whole.
Yugoslav Objectives: To stress the political need for greater sharing
of economic benefits by industrialized countries with LDCs and to urge
us to be more forthcoming on specific LDC demands; perhaps to press
for more frequent bilateral consultation on North/South issues.
Essential Factors: Yugoslavia and President Tito in particular have
been historic leaders of the “Third World.” They can justly claim a large
measure of the responsibility for initiating the variety of multilateral
economic discussions which we today call the North/South dialogue.
Yugoslavia’s leadership among LDCs on economic issues has decreased
as its own economy has developed and as the number of LDCs in the
G-77 has increased. While the Yugoslavs publicly support the demands
for a New International Economic Order, they have been willing to
compromise and can thus play a useful role as a moderator of
extreme views.
Multilateral discussions are going forward in many fora (the MTNs
in GATT, Common Fund in UNCTAD, etc.), but the main focus now
is on the new UN General Assembly Committee of the Whole, which
will “oversee” the North/South dialogue. An organizational meeting
of the Committee took place February 13–17, and the first substantive
meeting is scheduled to take place in May.
3 Cuba and other socialist countries were attempting to use the Puerto Rico issue
against the United States in the UN Special Committee on Decolonization. The U.S.
Government maintained that as long as Puerto Rico could vote for independence, the
issue was an internal matter and the UN had no jurisdiction.

Yugoslavia
Points to be Made:
—The U.S. supports an international economic system of progress
and cooperation based on equity, growth and, above all, justice.
—The U.S. is willing to discuss any issue of the North/South
dialogue so long as negotiations are confined to the functional fora
where they can be considered by technical experts in an atmosphere
relatively free of political debate.
—In our view, the UNGA Committee of the Whole got off to a
good start by agreeing at its organizational meeting in February to
discuss specific issues in a global economic context and to avoid inter-
vention in the ongoing negotiations in functional fora.
—It is very important for the new Committee of the Whole to
demonstrate that nations can examine the economic issues which affect
us all in a spirit of cooperation, rather than confrontation.
7. Middle East/Horn of Africa
President Tito will be interested in your latest assessment of devel-
opments and the prospects for resolving the disputes in these two
trouble spots. He will want to hear your presentation before respond-
ing, and would like to discuss both questions in some detail, following
the lines of his recent letters to you.
8. Southern Africa
U.S. Objectives: To gain Yugoslav support for U.S. efforts to work
toward a peaceful and just solution in Southern Africa.
Yugoslav Objectives: To urge more direct pressure on Pretoria and
Salisbury to bring about majority rule; to encourage more active U.S.
contact with the “liberation” forces.
Essential Factors: As one of the last “colonial” issues, Southern Africa
is obligatory as a topic “for the record.” Yugoslavia has long had
close ties with the African liberation movements and strongly supports
majority rule. It has been impressed and pleased with U.S. recent efforts
toward this goal, but Tito will urge that we do more.
Points to be Made:
—We oppose racism and apartheid in all forms and are pursuing
policies which we hope will lead to peaceful and just solutions to
problems of Namibia, Zimbabwe (Rhodesia) and South Africa.
—The recent proximity talks on Namibia in New York, while not
conclusive, registered some progress; further talks are expected.
—We regard reports from Salisbury of an internal “settlement” to
be premature.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
9. China/Korea
U.S. Objectives: To appear responsive to Tito’s desire for frank
exchanges on China and Korea; to seek his views on both countries;
to convince Tito that we are seriously interested in seeing the Korean
problem moved toward resolution but not at jeopardy to our South
Korean allies.
Yugoslav Objectives: To convey Tito’s impressions from his visits to
China and North Korea last summer and to seek current US views; to
urge that the U.S. deal directly with North Korea to try to unstick the
Korean question; to act as go-between in exchanges between the U.S.
and North Korea.
Essential Factors: Tito was enthusiastically welcomed in both coun-
tries last summer and Tito later wrote to you about his visit. He is now
interested in hearing our views on Chinese domestic developments,
on Sino-Soviet relations and on US-China relations. Concerning Korea,
he wrote to relay Kim Il-song’s proposals for direct US-North Korean
contacts or for tripartite (US, North and South Korea) talks, on condition
that South Korean President Park be removed from office. Tito has
argued that Kim is more realistic than he seems and that we should
respond in kind. Yugoslavia’s affinity for the North Koreans derives
largely from Pyongyang’s participation in the nonaligned movement.
For our part, we see no indication that North Korea’s position has
changed and we see the proposal for direct contacts as an effort to
undermine our relations with the ROK. Interestingly, however, two of
Pyongyang’s staunchest supporters—East Germany and the USSR—
have recently hinted that the North should show some flexibility, in
answer to our efforts to reduce friction.
Points to be Made:
—The Chinese, with the conclusion of the Fifth National People’s
Congress, have moved further toward restoring the vitality of their
government and party following Mao’s death.4
—Despite some evident reduction in hostility, we expect no signifi-
cant change in Sino-Soviet relations. The Chinese have frequently reaf-
firmed that their general line remains unchanged; and both sides have
continued routine polemics.
—On our own relations with China, we are continuing to work
toward our goal of full normalization, but there have been no significant
of China, which restored some judiciary, political, and citizen rights removed by the
1975 Constitution.

Yugoslavia
developments since your visit to China last fall. The central question
remains the problem of Taiwan, which is an issue with significant
domestic aspects in each country.
—On Korea, we believe that our publicly stated policy contains
certain elements of flexibility, and we continue to watch for some sign
of movement from the other side. We remain firmly committed to the
security of South Korea, and we will not take actions which would
result only in tactical gain for the North at the expense of the South.
—We have seen signs that some of the states which traditionally
support the North may have suggested that Pyongyang consider a
more flexible approach to the resolution of questions which contribute
to the tense atmosphere on the peninsula.
—Has the North’s approach to the situation changed in any way?
For example, would they be willing to support moves toward contacts
between their supporters and the South in exchange for reciprocal
moves on our part, as we have proposed?
—What measures could supporters of both Koreas take to stimulate
a resumption of the dialogue between North and South Korea?
253.
Editorial Note
Yugoslav President Josip Broz Tito to the White House with an arrival
ceremony on the South Grounds. In his welcoming remarks, Carter
called Tito “a remarkable man,” someone “who has understood for
a long time our own Nation’s commitment to détente and the true
significance of this misunderstood word.” Carter also underlined that
“the independence and the territorial integrity of Yugoslavia is one of
the basic foundations of world peace now and in the future.” In his
remarks, Tito stressed the “continuing, successful, and comprehensive
development of relations” between the two countries in “the already
established principles of independence, sovereignty, mutual respect,
Following the welcoming ceremony, Carter and Tito, as well as
the Yugoslav and U.S. delegations, met in the Cabinet Room for the
first scheduled meeting between the two Presidents. No record of the
conversation has been found. The Department summarized the visit
Central Foreign Policy File, D780116–1326) The Yugoslav side prepared
a transcript of the conversation which was found in the Archives of

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
Yugoslavia, Belgrade, Serbia. A copy of the original document and an
English translation are available at the Woodrow Wilson Center’s Cold
War International History Project (CWIHP), from which the excerpts
provided below were drawn.
The first of two conversations between the two leaders started in
the Cabinet Room at the White House at 11:15 a.m. and lasted until
12:40 p.m. and included several U.S. and Yugoslav officials. (Carter
Library, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary)
The conversation between the two Presidents focused on interna-
tional affairs, specifically, the situation in the Horn of Africa, the Middle
East, and North Korea. Tito told President Carter: “Just prior to my
arrival with the delegation to the U.S., I received messages from some
heads of states in which they express their positions, and are asking
me to convey them to you.” Tito continued: “I have accepted the
invitation to visit the U.S. with great pleasure because I wanted an
exchange of opinions about the current international situation as well
as convey my impressions about some countries that I visited.”
President Carter began by summarizing the administration’s posi-
tion on the crisis in the Horn of Africa and calling for Somali troops
to withdraw from the Ogaden as well as stressing that Ethiopian,
Cuban, or Soviet troops should not cross the border into Somalia. Carter
told Tito: “Our country is refraining from sending arms, be it to one
or another party. When the conflict ends, when the border is back to
its original place, Soviet and Cuban troops should be withdrawn from
that territory.”
On the basis of his extensive relationship with Ethiopian Emperor
Haile Selassie and with Somali President Siad Barre, Tito described
his understanding of how the situation reached a flash point. The
revolutionary Government in Ethiopia “visited Yugoslavia three
times,” Tito explained, and discussed the situation in Ethiopia with
the Yugoslav leadership. “We advised them to go for an autonomous
federation,” Tito recounted, but “they replied that it was not yet time
and that this would have to be resolved by military means.” Tito
continued: “Similarly, Siad Barre was also in Yugoslavia and I spoke
with him about the question of Ogaden. He also said that it would be
good for it to be federation, i.e. autonomy, but that Ogaden should be
part of Somalia.” Tito also stressed that it was Belgrade’s understanding
that other African countries were opposed to Somalia’s invasion of
Ethiopia, and feared that a Somali victory “would set a precedent and
that the war would spread throughout Africa, because there isn’t a
single country there that does not have some border issue.”
“We believe,” Tito concluded, “that it is necessary to resolve the
question of Eritrea and Ogaden, but within Ethiopia—to create an
autonomous region within a federation. But this would require the

Yugoslavia
support of the United Nations and of the Great Powers—first and
foremost the U.S.” Tito told Carter “I received your [January 31] letter
about our actions in the Horn of Africa. [see footnote 8, Document 251]
I think that what you have asked is entirely correct, albeit not to be
mediators but to continue further with our activity to contribute to a
peaceful resolution of the issue there as soon as possible. We have
already decided earlier that our Minister of Foreign Affairs, after our
return from the U.S., will go to Ethiopia and Somalia.” Tito promised
to inform the administration of the results of the Yugoslav diplomatic
mission to the two countries.
Carter stressed that the United States was “worried about the per-
manent or occasional presence of the Soviet and Cuban troops in that
region” and that he hoped Soviet and Cuban forces would withdraw
as soon as peace was established. Carter continued: “I hope that the
Soviet and Cuban troops will agree that the UN and the Organization
of African Unity should be included in the resolution of that conflict,
because we don’t want that part of the world to be a battlefield between
ourselves and the Soviet Union.” The two Presidents also discussed
Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs David
Aaron’s diplomatic Mission to Ethiopia. Tito promised to continue the
dialogue on the issue of the Horn with Moscow, saying that “I believe
that the Soviet Union should hear our opinion about this question.”
The two Presidents also discussed at length the situation in the
Middle East. While noting that some progress had been made—such
as Egyptian President’s Anwar al-Sadat’s November 20, 1977, visit to
Israel—Carter suggested that important problems still needed to be
resolved: “First: withdrawal from the occupied territories; second:
securing the borders; third: the right [of Israel] to existence as a nation;
fourth: the orientation toward a peaceful solution to all problems; fifth:
the Palestinian question.” Carter told Tito that “we don’t think that a
separate solution between Israel and Egypt [alone] could be a lasting
solution; we want an all-encompassing solution to this problem.”
For his part, Tito suggested that he had not agreed with Sadat’s
visit to Israel since Sadat “did not consult with other Arab states that
are at war with Israel.” “Of course,” Tito continued, “he did not ask
me either, but that is how he operates, that is his style. We have
distanced ourselves from this approach; we have been silent. It is
true that this act was very courageous, but also very risky, and what
happened, happened because no one supported him.” Tito also stressed
that, despite his disagreement with Sadat’s actions, he had given his
support to the Egyptian leader, because of the need to find a solution
to the crisis in the Middle East. Tito also informed Carter of the contents
of a letter he received from President Sadat on the situation in the
Middle East and that he was planning a response to the Egyptian leader
upon his return from Washington.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
Regarding the situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Tito informed the President that North Korean leader Kim Il-
song had asked him to convey a message on his behalf. “There is
nothing new in this message beyond what I had already conveyed to
you,” Tito told Carter, referencing his September 22, 1977, letter. (See
footnote 5, Document 243.) “The most important point is that they
want to have a dialogue, but not in the presence of the South Korean
President Park Chung-hee.” Kim Il-song had given his assurances, Tito
informed Carter, that the North had no desire to “impose their system
into South Korea.” “If there would be a meeting,” Tito continued, “not
at the top level but at the level of delegations of both countries, they
could discuss that question [of UN representation]. That way, it would
be possible to discuss the situation in much more detail, and what
needed to be done would become clearer. Of course, the U.S. should
provide its delegation as the third party.” “That is good advice,”
responded Carter, suggesting that Secretary of State Cyrus Vance and
Foreign Minister Milos Minic could further analyze the proposal. “I
will inform Kim Il-song about it,” Tito offered, “but I need to know if
you agree with my proposal.” Carter answered: “It would definitely
be better for us and for South Korea that our delegations meet at the
lower level; later we shall see.”
According to the English translation available in the CWIHP, the
meeting concluded at 12:35 p.m.

Yugoslavia
254.
Memorandum of Conversation1
SUBJECT
The Secretary’s Meeting with Yugoslav Foreign Secretary Minic
PARTICIPANTS
U.S.
The Secretary
The Counselor
Lawrence Eagleburger, U.S. Ambassador to Yugoslavia
George S. Vest, Assistant Secretary for European Affairs
Richard Holbrooke, Assistant Secretary for Asian and Pacific Affairs
Raymond Albright, Vice President of the Export-Import Bank
William H. Luers, Deputy Assistant Secretary for European Affairs
Louis V. Nosenzo, Deputy Assistant Secretary for Oceans, International
Environmental and Scientific Affairs
Nicholas G. Andrews, Director of the Office of Eastern European Affairs
Darryl N. Johnson, Country Officer for Yugoslavia
Michael Petrovich, Interpreter
YUGOSLAVIA
Milos Minic, Vice President of the Federal Executive Council and Federal
Secretary for Foreign Affairs
Dragan Bernardic, Assistant Federal Secretary for Foreign Affairs
Dimce Belovski, Yugoslav Ambassador to the United States
Svetozar Starcevic, Director of the Office of North American Affairs
Vladimir Sindjelic, Minister-Counselor of the Yugoslav Embassy, Washington
Vladimir Matic, Political Counselor of the Yugoslav Embassy, Washington
Zvonimir Petnicki, Interpreter
Korea. After opening remarks, Secretary Vance asked Secretary
Minic for clarification of President Tito’s comment to the President the
previous day suggesting contacts with North Korea.2 He wanted to
clarify that these contacts would involve the North and South Koreans
as well as the United States. Minic replied that this understanding was
correct. He continued that President Tito, before his departure for
Washington, had received a detailed message from President Kim Il-
song, but it contained no new ideas and largely repeated those which
President Tito had relayed to Carter last fall.3 The major obstacle to
conversations was still South Korean President Park. During Tito’s visit
Large and Representative of the President for Nonproliferation Matters (S/AS), Gerard
approved in S/S on March 23. The meeting took place in the Secretary’s Conference Room.
2 See Document 253.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
to Pyongyang, Kim had emphasized his willingness to hold talks with
both the United States and South Korea, but not with President Park.
President Carter’s reply had said that the U.S. was not in a position
to change Park. Therefore it is necessary to give thought to some new
approach. In his recent message, Kim had again insisted on the removal
of Park. The suggestion for lower-level talks was President Tito’s own
initiative and President Carter was the first person to whom he had
suggested it. If this is acceptable to the U.S., Tito would begin a dialogue
to see what the North Koreans would accept. At present the situation is
blocked, and the question is how to unblock it. This is Tito’s suggestion.
Kim’s stand is known and his first reaction will no doubt be negative.
But there may be some flexibility which the Yugoslavs will seek to
explore.
Secretary Vance emphasized that we would not take part in any
talks without the South Koreans being present. Minic reiterated that
the Yugoslavs understood this and noted that the North Koreans
wanted direct talks with the U.S. to replace the armistice agreement.
This subject was also discussed in detail in Peking, and the Chinese
indicated that they would not interfere in the Korean situation. A
solution depends entirely on the Koreans, they said. Tito discussed the
matter at length with Chairman Hua Kuo-feng and Minic himself with
Foreign Minister Huang Hua. He asked whether the U.S. agreed that
the situation was blocked.
Secretary Vance replied that we would consider the Yugoslav pro-
posal and that we had no difficulties with it, as stated. He expressed
his opinion that the South Koreans likewise would go along. The result
therefore, depends upon Kim Il-song. Minic said that the Yugoslavs
would be very satisfied if Kim recognizes the realities of the situation
and the need to break the deadlock. Assistant Secretary Holbrooke
said that perhaps the Yugoslavs could pursue the idea with the North
Koreans while we consult with the South Koreans. He agreed that the
idea was worth pursuing.
Science and Technology. Turning to bilateral matters, Secretary Vance
thanked Minic for his letter on the question of cooperation in science
and technology. He said he had followed up on the funding require-
ments to continue the program and told Minic that the President had
now agreed that we would seek a $7 million appropriation (to cover
a five-year period) on a matching basis.4 This appropriation would be
4 In a January 30 letter delivered by the Yugoslav Embassy to the Department of
State, Minic suggested that the U.S. Government pay annuitants in Yugoslavia in dollars
to free up dinars for the program. (Telegram 48421 to Belgrade, February 24; National
ment 251.

Yugoslavia
a part of the regular State Department budget, and the program would
be administered by the State Department. Minic said this was a satisfac-
tory solution and he emphasized the importance of the program for
mutual understanding, particularly for Yugoslavia as a developing
country. Secretary Vance said we agree on its importance, and will be
pleased if we can continue it by this means.
Economic Matters, Exim Bank. On the question of loans and “super-
guarantees”, Minic said that he was glad to see the representative of
the U.S. EximBank in the meeting and suggested that perhaps this was
the moment when the two sides could reach agreement.5 Before coming
to Washington, Minic said he had held detailed talks with the Prime
Minister, the Finance Minister and the Vice Premier about this problem.
The situation now is that the U.S. has made a proposal which is not
acceptable in its present form to the Yugoslav side. He outlined the
Yugoslav position as follows:
Cooperation with ExIm has been very significant. Until a year ago
50% of U.S. loans were through ExIm. Now the percentage has dropped
to thirty but the government of Yugoslavia is very interested in continu-
ing its cooperation with ExIm. However, the new Constitution and the
law of associated labor had introduced reforms. Under these provisions
the Government of Yugoslavia and the National Bank do not have the
right to issue “super-guarantees”. In order to reinstitute this procedure,
a change of the law and perhaps an amendment to the Constitution
would be necessary. Individual banks, a group of banks or a consortium
of banks could give guarantees. Or a new bank for Export and Import
which Yugoslavia is establishing to deal with questions of foreign trade
and financing could give guarantees. The government can say that any
bank or group of banks can get the required amounts of foreign
exchange to meet its obligations on the basis of its dinar holdings. In
the Yugoslav view, this should be sufficient to meet the requirement
for guarantees. All European banks have agreed to this system and no
longer require a “super-guarantee”. He urged that we do everything
possible to resolve this problem. After this visit, the Secretary of Finance
will send a written proposal to ExIm giving a detailed response.
Minic added that the Yugoslav side had a very positive reaction
to the formation of working groups on economic cooperation to be
headed by Assistant Ministers and Ambassadors. He said that economic
5 The Yugoslav Government advised the ExIm Bank that it would no longer be
able to provide “super-guarantees” by the Yugoslav National Bank on ExIm loans to
Yugoslav businesses. Tarnoff informed Brzezinski of the emerging dispute between the
ExIm Bank and the Yugoslav Government in a February 11 memorandum. (Carter
Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, VIP Visit File, Box 15, Yugoslavia,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
ties with the United States had not developed sufficiently. Trade with
the Soviet Union last year was approximately $2.5 billion. With the
FRG, trade was approximately $2 billion, but was not balanced, with
Yugoslavia having a huge deficit of $1.2 billion. In the past the deficit
had been largely made up by revenues from tourism and remittances
from Yugoslavs working in Germany. But this past year there was a
was well developed but also unbalanced. With the U.S. the long-term
aim is to expand trade and the U.S. should be among those in the first
rank of Yugoslav trading partners. The present deficit situation with
the EEC cannot continue in its present form. The difficulties with the
EEC already transcend tolerable limits. Its trade with third countries
is highly protectionist, especially on agricultural products. It is a very
difficult situation in which Yugoslavia can cover only thirty percent
of its trade through exports. The U.S. market is fair but difficult for
Yugoslav exporters. Exchanges in recent years have been more or less
balanced. There have been talks with the EEC, but the first round did
not give grounds for optimism. Yugoslavia’s aim is to expand economic
ties with the U.S., and ExIm should seek to help in this process.
Secretary Vance said that we welcome Yugoslavia’s objective of
expanding economic relations with the U.S. and we agree with it. He
thanked Minic for his proposal on ExIm and said that he would discuss
the matter further with Mr. Albright and President Moore and would
be back in touch. The important thing, he said, is to find a solution to
this question. Minic reemphasized his wish that the U.S. government
promote the long-term expansion of trade and finance and added that
U.S. businessmen know well the Yugoslav laws which encourage
foreign investment. Expansion remains the important thing, including
industrial cooperation.
Krsko Fuel License. Minic called on Assistant Secretary Bernardic to
discuss the Krsko question. He noted that Bernardic and Assistant
Secretary Vest had met the previous evening and that Bernardic had
presented the Yugoslav suggestion for an interim agreement pending
adoption of an international convention on nuclear export controls.6
Bernardic said his talks with Vest had been very useful but he empha-
sized that these were not negotiations, which must be left to Ambassa-
dor Kljun and U.S. officials who deal with this question. Their conversa-
tion was intended to move the effort forward. He said that the situation
is now very fluid with some important matters not clearly defined,
6 No separate record of the meeting was found. In telegram 67708 to Belgrade,
March 16, Andrews informed the Embassy that the discussion took place, but that
“Bernardic did not go into any more detail than he did at the Vance-Minic meeting.”

Yugoslavia
including the agreements with the IAEA, and the implementation of
the new U.S. law on nuclear exports. Also, he said, the INFCE will
continue its work over the next two years or more and a UN Conference
on Nuclear Energy will be convened. It is important that any arrange-
ment made now be consistent with agreements already concluded or
to be concluded. The Yugoslavs thought it premature to go for a long-
term agreement at this time and therefore suggested a temporary agree-
ment for four or five years to provide the fuel and to await the conclu-
sion of an international convention. Under this arrangement Yugoslavia
would clearly reaffirm its commitments under the NPT as well as
bilateral and international commitments. When these are summed up,
they would cover all matters of concern to the U.S. side. Such a solution
would meet the requirements of the Yugoslav situation. Yugoslavia
was among the first signers of the NPT and was in the front line of those
countries fighting for it. Between the industrialized and nonaligned
countries there is need to understand the needs of each and to meet
the special requirements in this case. We should be able to work out
an interim solution; we should examine the concrete situation and
should seek to help the negotiations.
Mr. Vest replied that this Yugoslav approach differs significantly
from that discussed earlier, and that he had not had a chance to consult
with the experts on the subject. He said it would also have to be
acceptable to the Nuclear Regulatory Commission and in harmony
with our new legislation. We will pursue this matter. Secretary Vance
said that the plan for continuing discussions was a good one, but that
the subject is very difficult because of the strict limits of our law.
We will do all we can within those limits and without discrimination
against others with whom we deal on this question. Minic said he
also agreed that the two sides should meet soon to continue their
discussions. (The Yugoslavs will give us their proposal in writing.)
Emigre Matters and Terrorism. Minic said that the Yugoslavs are
pleased to note that the present Administration is acting more energet-
ically on this question. During President Ford’s visit to Belgrade in
1975, Minic had given a pro memoria paper to Secretary Kissinger on
all of these matters. Now there was a new paper which brought the
information up to date. The problem basically is that there are too
many acts by the same small groups of people which remain unsolved
and unpunished.
Secretary Vance said that this is a matter of great importance to
us and that since the Carter Administration came into office we have
seen the resolution of the TWA hijacking and of the break-in at the
Yugoslav UN Mission. (He noted that in these matters we were
following actions initiated during the prior Administration.) He contin-
ued that we also feel very strongly about the broader question of

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
international terrorism and that we supported efforts in the UN and
elsewhere to find effective measures to combat it. We hope that we
can work together with Yugoslavia to put teeth into these measures.
Minic said he agreed on the problem, and in the UN there had been
some efforts. But there were differing views. The main issue concerned
the “national liberation” movements. It is difficult among the non-
aligned to get agreement if the effect is to inhibit the struggle by those
involved in “national liberation” movements. If the political causes
which give rise to these kinds of disturbances were resolved the broader
issue could also be resolved. In that case, we would be left with the
other problem, which is a common threat to mankind. He suggested
that the U.S. talk with other nonaligned countries, and offered to be
of assistance in arranging these contacts. Secretary Vance said we
agreed that such consultations would be useful and we will seek them
with other nonaligned countries as well as with Yugoslavia.
Minic said that he thought all bilateral matters had been covered
and that the two secretaries should tell the two Presidents that they need
not deal with them, but could go on to other international questions.
Secretary Vance agreed.
Horn of Africa. Noting that there were some additional time remain-
ing, Secretary Minic said that he would like to follow up on some of
the topics discussed the previous day by the two Presidents. On the
Horn of Africa, he said that he would be received by both Mengistu
(of Ethiopia) and Siad Barre (of Somalia) on his forthcoming visit. He
said he hoped both would not be angry because of President Tito’s
comments in his interview with James Reston. Regardless of this, Yugo-
slavia has very good relations with both, and both want Yugoslavia’s
full support in their dispute. The Yugoslavs have told them that they
cannot agree that war can solve their problems, and that these and
similar questions must be resolved by peaceful means. The Yugoslavs
had thought much about this question, and others including President
Carter had also expressed their concern. Yugoslavia has a diplomatic
dialogue with both countries, but feels that no solution is possible until
the military situation changes. It now appears that the military situation
is changing so a solution may be closer. It should be on the basis on
the principles outlined by the two Presidents in their previous meeting.
It is best that neither side be victor nor vanquished but resolve the
matter fairly through negotiations. Yugoslavia has informed five or six
countries about its plan and has asked for parallel approaches. All
would be informed of the results. Concerning the U.S., it would be
very good to implement the understanding between Mr. Aaron and
President Mengistu and send a new Ambassador to Ethiopia as soon
as possible. This should go together with further efforts to bring about
the withdrawal of Soviet and Cuban forces. Minic asked that we con-

Yugoslavia
sider candidly why Ethiopia was pushed to seek aid from the other
side. The withdrawal of US aid had been a big blow. Ethiopia was a
very poor country, with a per capita income of about $50 per year. Thus
it needed aid wherever it could get it. The US should also encourage
Ethiopian nonalignment. Mengistu was strongly committed to non-
alignment, but there are many younger people near the top who may
not be. The important thing now is to maintain a dialogue.
Secretary Vance thanked Minic for Yugoslavia’s assistance on Mr.
Aaron’s recent trip to Ethiopia. He agreed that the solution to the
conflict would have to come through negotiations and noted that Soviet
and Cuban troops would have to be withdrawn. He expressed concern
about the apparent ineffectiveness of the OAU mediation effort, which
had largely fallen through. He was not sure that the OAU could handle
the problem, and asked what the role of outside powers should be if
the instrument the Africans prefer to use cannot be effective.
Minic replied that the OAU is in a period of crisis, and that its
problems parallel those of the current conflict. He agreed that the
OAU should assume responsibility for solving the problem. Outside
interference is “most obnoxious”. Friendly advice and influence are
not out of line, but the OAU should play the main role. Yugoslavia is
in contact with Foreign Minister Garba of Nigeria, who understands
the problem very well. (Secretary Vance said that we are also in close
contact with Garba.) Garba has asked for patience, but the Yugoslavs
believe that the OAU cannot do much and others should try to help.
Minic will carry messages from Tito to Siad Barre and Mengistu and
to President Numayri of the Sudan, who is also very concerned. Minic
promised to inform us of the results of his visit.7
Secretary Vance said that it will be worthwhile to talk with the
Sudan, which has offered to mediate. Garba has indicated that he will
call on the ad hoc committee to meet with the entire OAU board. We
should press for a solution along the lines discussed by President Carter
and Tito, and he would look forward to Minic’s report.
Minic said he hoped India could play a role, and Foreign Minister
Vajpayee will become more active, if Prime Minister Desai agrees.
Vance said he had also discussed this matter with Vajpayee during the
President’s visit to India.
7 On April 14, Belovski met with Newsom to deliver a letter from Minic to Vance
on his trip to Ethiopia, Somalia, the Sudan, and the Soviet Union. The meeting and letter
Minic for the information on his mission to the Horn of Africa and describing his talks
in Moscow with Foreign Minister Gromyko. The Department forwarded the text of the
Policy File, D780204–0269)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
Middles East. Regarding yesterday’s talks Minic wanted to make it
clear that although President Tito indicated that he would not have
supported President Sadat’s recent initiative if Sadat had sought his
view, there was no dispute about Egypt’s right to choose the means it
felt would be most effective. Yugoslavia did not comment at the time
but felt that the initiative would not work. They foresaw that one result
would be that a group of Arab countries would form a “rejection front”
and would look for support from the Soviet Union. This has indeed
happened. Tito told those who met in Tripoli to adopt a moderate
approach, but they did not and the extremist statement which resulted
from that meeting was “ridiculous”. After waiting for the situation to
settle down, those countries have been in touch with Tito and have
exchanged messages. Tito advised that the solution could not come
through extreme opposition to Egypt or in an extreme reaction by
Egypt. But Sadat “very emotionally” broke relations with all those
countries. Yugoslav efforts now are directed at overcoming the prob-
lems between the other Arabs and Egypt. Yugoslavia advised that the
“rejectionists” meet again to adopt a more realistic position. He asked
what can be done if the direct Egypt-Israeli talks do not produce a
result. The situation is very dangerous. Yugoslavia does not share the
opinion that this would bring about the downfall of Sadat, since he
has great support in Egypt. But it is possible that he will then draw
on this support to turn to a harder line. He will say that he has done
all he possibly can and taken great risks but that Israel has not been
responsive. He may also say that the U.S. did not give enough support
to his efforts. Then the whole issue will be back to the starting line.
Minic asked if in our view there was any other approach and inquired
about the possibility of a preparatory conference for a Geneva Confer-
ence which would include all likely participants. He said that this idea
has not yet been discussed with [us?] but Yugoslavia believes that UN
Secretary General Waldheim’s recent initiative was a good one, though
premature. Is there any third road to a solution, he asked, and what
is the current status of the joint statement between Secretary Vance
and Soviet Foreign Minister Gromyko last October?8 Was it still valid,
were the Soviets still interested in playing a role?
Secretary Vance said that the joint statement with Gromyko stands
and the Soviets agree that it remains valid. Minic noted that the Yugo-
slavs had expressed support for the statement on the day it was issued.
8 The United States and the Soviet Union issued a joint statement on the Middle
East on October 1, 1977. The statement proposed guidelines and procedures for Arab-
Israeli negotiations of a comprehensive peace settlement in the Middle East and called
for an international conference in Geneva. (Department of State Bulletin, November 7,

Yugoslavia
Vance said that the statement is being used as a basis for negotiating
a Declaration of Principles among the relevant states. There is nothing
inconsistent between the statement and our mediating role. Unfortu-
nately, the parties are still far apart on the questions of the Palestinians
and the Gaza Strip. It is still too early to say that direct negotiations have
failed and we feel that we should continue to support this approach.
In this connection we invited Prime Minister Begin, and President Sadat
agrees with this. (The Secretary said that we would inform Yugoslavia
about the results of the Begin visit.)9
We must pursue the present course until its succeeds or fails, and
we should know soon about the outcome. If it fails we believe that the
Waldheim proposal for a wider meeting within the context of the
United Nations but separate from the Geneva Conference, is a worth-
while possibility. It should, however, be seen as a preparation for
the Geneva Conference. The Secretary said that he had discussed this
question last week with Secretary General Waldheim. Minic said he
agreed with this assessment and Vance said that he did not see a third
alternative as being necessary yet.
Secretary Minic then said that he had been very satisfied with this
discussion and felt that this personal contact was very useful and
helpful. He suggested that in addition to the messages between the
two Presidents, he and Vance write to each other if there are matters
which they feel can be dealt with at that level. Secretary Vance said
that is an excellent idea which he wholeheartedly supports. Minic then
invited Secretary Vance to come to Yugoslavia as he had previously
promised and Secretary Vance said that is a promise he intended to
carry out with great pleasure.
points for briefing of host governments on Begin and Dayan’s visit to the United States.
from Belgrade, May 12, the Embassy reported Eagleburger’s conversation on May 10
with Yugoslav Foreign Ministry Assistant Secretary Komatina, in which the Ambassador
briefed the Yugoslav official on the visit. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
Policy File, D780203–0446)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
255.
Editorial Note
On March 9, 1978, President Jimmy Carter and Yugoslav President
Cabinet Room. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily
Diary) This time Secretary of Defense Harold Brown also joined the
U.S. delegation, while Vice President Walter Mondale was absent. No
transcript of the conversation has been found in U.S. archives. The
Yugoslav Government prepared its own memorandum of conversation,
available in the Archives of Yugoslavia, Belgrade, Serbia. A copy of
the document and its translation are available in the Woodrow Wilson
Center’s Cold War International History Project (CWIHP). The excerpts
below are taken from the CWIHP translation.
Noting that the March 8 discussion between Secretary of State
Cyrus Vance and Yugoslav Foreign Minister Milos Minic was success-
ful, Carter suggested continuing their discussion of international issues,
unless President Tito felt it necessary to clarify some of the remaining
bilateral issues. Tito replied: “I would like to talk about the issues of
détente as one of the key issues in the relations between the U.S. and
the Soviet Union.” “I have been convinced,” Tito stated, “that you are
making efforts from your side toward détente.” Noting that more trust
was necessary to improve the relationship between the two superpow-
ers, Tito assured Carter that he would “report to Brezhnev the general
impression I got from you about the issues of international problems
and détente, including my opinion that it would be necessary for the
two of you to meet and have a dialogue among yourselves.” Informing
Tito of the outstanding invitation to the White House he had extended
to Brezhnev, Carter added: “I would be grateful, Mr. President, if you
could influence him so that he accepts the invitation and visits the U.S.”
The two leaders discussed the developing situation in Somalia, as
well as their respective positions vis-à-vis the situation in Rhodesia
and Namibia. The United States and United Kingdom had carried
out joint negotiations on the Rhodesia problem, Carter informed Tito.
Carter continued: “There are good contacts with the presidents of the
so-called Frontline States and with the members of the United Nations.
We cannot recognize the so-called internal settlement of the problem
if it is not in the line with the Anglo-American negotiations. We hope
we will be able to help the national leaders to meet in the near future.”
Carter expressed his hope that, when the new Rhodesian Government
was formed and recognized, it “will refuse the involvement of the
foreign forces, which should not interfere with the internal issues of
Rhodesia.”
Turning to the upcoming Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) Foreign
Ministers’ conference in Belgrade, Tito informed Carter that the Yugo-

Yugoslavia
slav Government remained very active in its preparation as well as
the preparation for the NAM summit in Havana, which he hoped
would contribute to a constructive conference. “Now we have a situa-
tion in which non-aligned countries are at war with one another,” Tito
declared, making reference to the Horn of Africa and the situation in
South East Asia. Tito continued: “There is an important issue for the
Non-Aligned countries to deal with: preventing the split of the non-
aligned countries into ‘right’ and ‘left,’ into ‘progressive’ and ‘non-
progressive’ countries.” Tito concluded: “We all must work to prevent
that from happening. There are such tendencies from several sides,”
alluding to Cuba, “and we will not allow this to happen.” As Carter
expressed his concern that Havana might not be the most appropriate
venue for the next NAM conference, Tito replied: “We are concerned
about Cuba too, but what can we do?” He continued: “If we allowed
a split into ‘progressive’ and ‘non-progressive’ countries, we would
face quarrels internally and externally.” “That is why the Conference of
Foreign Ministers in Belgrade is important,” Minic interjected, “because
many are concerned about how the Conference in Havana will proceed,
because they are concerned that Havana may direct the Non-Aligned
Movement in a different direction.” The Belgrade conference, Minic
concluded, should “achieve a platform that cannot be changed.”
The conversation then shifted to the relationship between the Soviet
Union and the United States. Minic stated that “it seems that the Soviet
Union has come to believe that U.S.A. is not in any hurry to conclude
SALT, but is seeking to postpone [agreement].” “We hear” he contin-
ued, that the Soviet leadership believed that this is “a calculating move
to prolong the arms race, and this is a great burden on the Soviet
Union. Since the U.S. economy is far stronger than the Soviet economy,
it is easier for the U.S. to endure the [arms] race and, according to
President Tito’s talks with Brezhnev, there is a serious [Soviet] interest
that race be stopped so that Brezhnev can focus on the internal prob-
lems, which are quite severe.” The Middle East situation, which the
Soviet bureaucracy saw as a ploy by the United States to limit Soviet
influence in the region, was described by Minic as another reason for
Soviet distrust of the United States. Lastly, Minic suggested that U.S.
policy on human rights added to Soviet apprehensions: “In talks with
them, we see that they perceive it as a calculating move to destabi-
lize the East European countries.” Minic concluded: “Much will need
to be done to dispel Soviet belief that this action is aimed at destabilizing
Eastern European countries.” Human rights, Carter responded, could
easily be solved during a meeting with Brezhnev.
What “worries us tremendously,” Carter noted, “is the issue of
enormous increase in armament of the Soviet Union, which is con-
stantly increasing military expenditures, three to four percent above

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
inflation, while our military budget is smaller than 18 years ago.” Carter
continued: “This worries not only us, but also China and Western
Europe. We believe that the Soviet commitment to increase its conven-
tional and nuclear weapons [stockpiles] is much larger than what is
required for self-defense.” Carter concluded that, while “there are
world problems, world issues, which connect the United States with
the Soviet Union,” these issues are “stronger than the disagreements,
the differences that divide us.” He told the Yugoslav delegation: “We
are very grateful that you are ready to relay our opinion to the Soviet
Union, and that you have passed to us their opinions.”
The meeting ended with an appeal from Tito for a halt in the U.S.
development of the neutron bomb. “I think the bomb is wrong,” Tito
declared. “The Soviet Union and the U.S. have nuclear weapons, and
these are very powerful weapons,” he continued. “Regarding the N
bomb, the Soviet Union can make it within a short period of time, but
it costs a great deal, it is a burden on its economy. I think that, if there
was to be a war and the neutron bomb were to be used, nuclear weapons
will be used immediately after. I am certain of that, because neither
side will allow itself to be defeated. This all leads in the direction of
mutual self-annihilation,” Tito concluded. Carter countered that the
United States had not yet made the decision as to whether to produce
the bomb, and that it was a weapon limited to a defensive character.
“The Soviet S–20 bombs are much more dangerous,” Carter added,
“and the S–20 also worries Western Europe, not just us.” Carter con-
cluded: “The Soviet Union has a large number of various weapons
which are much more dangerous and have a greater impact and range
than the Neutron bomb.” The meeting ended at 11:04, when Carter
escorted Tito to the South Lawn for his departure.
In the joint statement released by the two governments at the
conclusion of the visit, the discussions were described as “extensive
and useful,” held in “a spirit of mutual regard, candor, and friendship”
and that the meeting reinforced “the already strong foundations of the
US-Yugoslav relations.” The joint statement also referenced that the
two Presidents had emphasized “the decisive importance of the devel-
opment of energy for the economic growth of all countries, and of
the developing countries in particular, and they believe therefore that
nuclear energy for peaceful purposes should be made accessible to all
countries without discrimination.” (Public Papers: Carter, 1978, Book I,
pages 485–488)

Yugoslavia
256.
Telegram From the Embassy in Yugoslavia to the
Department of State1
5561. Subj: Tito and Harriman Meeting.2
1. Governor Harriman, accompanied by Ambassador Eagleburger,
was received July 28 by President Tito at his private retreat on the
island of Vanga. Following an hour and fifteen minute conversation
between the Governor and the President, attended by Ambassador
Eagleburger and Tito’s Chef d’Cabinet Bauderina, President Tito hosted
a luncheon for the Governor and Mrs. Harriman, attended by Ambassa-
dor and Mrs. Eagleburger, Mr. Bauderina and a few other Yugoslav
guests.
2. During the meeting preceding lunch the discussion included
nonalignment, Soviet-US relations, China, and US-Yugoslav relations.
Highlights of the conversation on each of these subjects follows:
3. Nonalignment. Governor Harriman complimented President
Tito on his speech to the NAM conference,3 saying it showed what
“real nonalignment is,” and asked for the President’s evaluation of the
current state of the NAM, and Cuba’s role therein. President Tito said
that the nonaligned are now faced with efforts to dilute the concept
of nonalignment as established in 1961. The Cubans will be nominally
at the head of the movement for the three years following the Havana
Summit and Yugoslavia is working hard now to assure that Castro
will not “dominate” the NAM during that period. He asked rhetorically
Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Drafted and approved by Eagleburger. (National Archives,
RG 59, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Lawrence S. Eagleburger, Under Secretary of State
for Political Affairs, Ambassador to Yugoslavia, Under Secretary of State for Management
2 Harriman also met with Vrhovec to discuss the Non-Aligned Movement (telegram
0204) and the status of US-Yugoslav bilateral relations. (Telegram 5696 from Belgrade,
In a July 21 memorandum to Carter, Brzezinski recommended that the President sign
a message to Vrhovec, who served as Chairman of the Conference. The message had been
privately requested by the Yugoslavs earlier, to “strengthen the hand of the moderates
in dealing with the Cubans and their friends during the meeting.” Brzezinski suggested
that, while the message might not have much of an impact on the outcome of the meeting,
it would “reinforce our position that we believe the Non-aligned [Movement] can be a
constructive force in world affairs.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski
approved the message. (Ibid.) The message was transmitted to Eagleburger on July 24
in telegram 185993 to Belgrade. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
“where was Cuba in 1961 when we began things?” and added that the
effort by “some” to turn the NAM into a “third factor between the
blocs, but supporting one bloc, could only make the world situation
worse.” Yugoslavia did not intend to let that happen. Tito went on to
say that Castro will not succeed in his attempts to split the movement
into what Cuba describes as “progressive” and “reactionary” factions,
and that Yugoslavia had strong allies in its battle against Castro’s
attempts to take over the movement. These allies, he said, include
Algeria, Tanzania, India, Sri Lanka, Bangladesh, Zambia, and “many
others.” “We are not afraid,” he said, “and we are ready to do battle.”
4. In response to a Harriman question on Soviet and Cuban activi-
ties in Africa, Tito said that “some intervention” in African affairs may
be a necessary evil, given the current state of relations on the continent.
But no African country will let its policies be changed by the presence
of foreign elements within the country. President Tito noted that he
was particularly pleased that in the speeches given at the opening
session of the NAM Conference this week in response to his address,
the spokesmen from each of the four continents went out of their way
to stress the need for NAM unity and to pay tribute to Yugoslavia for
its leading role within the movement.
5. US-Soviet relations. Governor Harriman noted that US-Soviet
relations had deteriorated in the period since the Governor had seen
President Tito in Washington last March. The Governor said he wanted
to reassure President Tito, however, that President Carter remains
firmly committed to both SALT and a CTB. He added that Secretary
Vance has developed a very good relationship of mutual confidence
with Foreign Minister Gromyko and that he believes that this personal
relationship will be a great asset in the months ahead. He went on to
explain to President Tito the severe impact that the Shcharanskiy trial4
has had on Congress and public opinion in the United States and that
as a consequence the President’s room for maneuver would continue
severely restricted in the absence of some conciliatory move on the
part of the Soviets. The Governor asked whether President Tito saw
any way for the US and the Soviets to move to free themselves from
their present difficulties.
5. President Tito replied that he had heard that there was a possibil-
ity of an exchange of the two Soviet spies arrested in New York for
Shcharanskiy, and that if this exchange went forward it might at least
serve to remove the case as a cause celebre. Governor Harriman said
4 Anatoly Borisovich Shcharansky, human rights activist and spokesman for the
Moscow Helsinki Group was considered one of the founders of the Refusnik movement
in the Soviet Union. In 1977, he was arrested on charges of spying for the United States
and sentenced to 13 years in a labor camp. Released in 1986, he emigrated to Israel.

Yugoslavia
that he also understood that such an exchange might be a possibility
but did not know whether it would in fact take place.
6. President Tito said “I continue to hope that the United States is
ready to put the issue of human rights in its proper perspective and
emphasize attempts to resolve the main issues that exist between the
US and the USSR. That is the impression I got from President Carter
when I visited Washington, and I hope it is still his intention.” Governor
Harriman commented that the Shcharanskiy case—a direct Soviet prov-
ocation and personal insult to the President—has deeply provoked the
American public. Did President Tito have any suggestions on how we
might proceed now, given the impact of the Shcharanskiy case? Tito
said that the United States must understand that Soviet prestige is
intimately involved in the Shcharanskiy and Ginzburg cases.5 The Sovi-
ets are intent upon showing the US and the dissidents that the latter
cannot be “used” in discussions of other issues. The Soviets are doing
this for both internal and international reasons. They have decided to
be “more determined” in their opposition to the United States; they
intend to show that the Soviets will not, when pushed on the issue of
dissidents, retreat. They mean to demonstrate to the United States that
it must stay out of the internal affairs of the Soviet Union.
7. Governor Harriman pointed out that despite the differences over
human rights the Soviets continue to be ready to negotiate on SALT
and have for the first time put forth a constructive MBFR proposal.
Moscow is, in other words, indicating its desire to move ahead in the
area of arms control, which is of interest to both countries. This is true,
said Tito, but Moscow considers US involvement with the dissidents
as interference in its internal affairs and will not accept it. Shcharanskiy,
Ginzburg, and the other dissidents are, so far as Moscow is concerned,
citizens of the Soviet Union, and only they can decide the manner in
which they will be judged under their laws. “Personally I feel that the
Soviets are not unrealistic in their view that no one can play in their
internal affairs. Frankly, the administration’s most serious mistake was
to have put such extreme emphasis on human rights at the Belgrade
Conference” (CSCE). Every large country, said Tito, will always insist
that it has the right to decide its own affairs. So far as US public opinion
is concerned, Moscow believes that has always been anti-Soviet and
therefore changes in degree are unimportant. The Soviets are not partic-
ularly impressed with administration arguments about its public opin-
ion problems.
5 Vitaly Lazarevich Ginzburg, Soviet journalist, author, and human rights activist.
He was imprisoned several times in the 1960s and released and expelled from the Soviet
Union in 1979.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
8. Governor Harriman said that President Carter has consistently
and recently made it clear that neither he nor the United States Govern-
ment wants to intervene in the internal affairs of the Soviet Union.
But, with regard to the Shcharanskiy case, there is no way that the
administration can change its present position. The Soviets need to
make some gesture.
9. President Tito returned again to his reference to the Belgrade.
CSCE, saying that the administration’s initial approach to human rights
was “unfortunate.” Washington failed to recognize that the Belgrade
CSCE was to address issues of European security; those security issues
should have been the focus, rather than the overwhelming emphasis
on human rights. Tito said there is no question that human rights are
important, but there should be some “balance.”
10. What is needed now, Tito said, is to find some way to “freeze
the controversy” so that the US and the USSR can devote themselves
to basic issues. Perhaps the administration, while continuing to main-
tain the importance of human rights, could emphasize the need to
resolve basic differences between the two countries that affect the possi-
bilities for peace.
11. China. Governor Harriman recalled that President Tito had
once told him that the Chinese had called him a “revisionist bandit,”
but relations now have greatly changed. He asked for the President’s
view of China. Tito said he had some impressions from his recent visit
to Peking, and would know more following Hua Kuo-feng’s visit to
Yugoslavia in August. He indicated that as far as he was concerned
there is no question that the new Chinese leadership is actively search-
ing for ways to open itself to the world; they know they cannot develop
without contact with the outside; they are a poor country and greatly
in need of technological and industrial development and vast improve-
ment in their agricultural situation. They are interested in Western
technology to make up for their backwardness; additionally, they are
intent upon creating a modern army since they recognize that numbers
are no longer the “essential factor.” “The Chinese want—and they
are absolutely right—maximum security. And they want to know the
world better.”
12. Tito said that during his visit to Peking he had reproached the
Chinese leadership with regard to their policy in Africa. He said that
the PRC was so intensely anti-Soviet that it was prepared to support
whatever African regime found itself threatened by the USSR or allies
of the USSR. This is, said Tito, “unprincipled.” But at the same time
he recognized that it was inevitable, since Peking views the USSR as
its “first and main enemy.”
13. President Tito said that he would hold extensive talks with
Hua Kuo-feng when the latter is in Belgrade. The Chinese have indi-

Yugoslavia
cated they are interested in studying Yugoslavia’s agricultural system,
its industrial development and its system of self management. The
Chinese may try to introduce at least some aspects of the self manage-
ment system in an attempt to stimulate production.
14. Governor Harriman noted that he was sure that any thoughts
President Tito might have on China following the August Hua Kuo-
feng visit would be of great interest to President Carter. He hoped the
President would pass anything of interest on to Washington. Tito
replied that he would do so “gladly.”
15. US-Yugoslav relations. Governor Harriman said that it was his
impression that our bilateral relations were at a new high point. Presi-
dent Tito said that was correct; they are very good and improving
every day. President of the National Assembly Markovic had reported
to him on his recent visit to the United States, and had indicated his
great satisfaction with it.6 There are no major problems between our
two countries and many small matters have also been settled. There
are a few small issues (unspecified) still between us, but they are of
no significance. Tito said that he had a very good impression of Presi-
dent Carter when he met with him. He recognizes that President Carter
had initial problems with the Congress but considers him “a sincere,
honest, devoted leader who wants to accomplish much.”
16. The President then said: “The United States must understand
that if we sometimes are critical it is only because we mean the US
well. We have learned to live together as friends despite the fact that
one or the other may be critical on occasion. With some other countries,
however, where on its face it appears that Yugoslavia has very good
relations, it is a fact that in reality the relations are not good. And you
know who I mean.” (This is obviously a reference to the Soviet Union.)
17. Tito recalled that in his first meeting with Governor Harriman
when the latter was Ambassador in Moscow during the war, the Gover-
nor had told him of Stalin’s highly critical anti-Tito remarks. Tito said
it is an interesting fact that whenever Stalin dealt with him, he was
kind, he made a great fuss, etc. But he (Tito) knew the true reality.
6 On July 19, Mondale met at the White House with Dragoslav Markovic, President
of the Yugoslav Assembly, who led a delegation of Yugoslav Assembly members to meet
with U.S. Government and legislative officials in Washington. Markovic and Mondale
discussed the state of U.S.-Yugoslav relations. Carter briefly stopped by to greet the
delegation. The Department informed the Embassy of the discussion in telegram 192091
0046) Prior to the Mondale-Markovic meeting, Vance, joined by Harriman and Vest, met
with the Djuranovic and Vrhovec in New York on May 25 to discuss the Non-Aligned
Movement and exchange views on the state of the international system. (Department
of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Cyrus R. Vance, Secretary of State—1977–1980,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
Governor Harriman replied that Stalin was a very insincere man. “You,
Mr. President, were the first to expose him and that destroyed his
ambitions for domination of the World Communist Movement.” Tito
replied “Absolutely. Had we not said ‘no’ to him when we did, other
difficulties would have arisen for us and the rest of the world, and
God knows where we would now be.”
18. Governor Harriman then asked President Tito about his
relations with Chairman Brezhnev. Tito replied that they were very
good, “but I think many things are being done to us despite him.”
19. In reply to an observation by Governor Harriman that it was
his feeling that Brezhnev appeared to be in the middle of opposing
forces within the Politburo and not strong enough to contain them,
Tito replied that that was his belief as well. Tito said that he believes
Brezhnev to be well intentioned but clearly weakened by ill health.
Suslov is the force that is difficult for Brezhnev to control.
20. Comment: It was Governor Harriman’s impression that, in
comparison with the last meeting between the two in Washington in
March, President Tito had deteriorated substantially in alertness and
vitality. (This is a view that Ambassador Eagleburger shares from his
own observation of President Tito during the March visit to Washing-
ton.) This was most evident in the early stages of the discussion, but
the President became more animated as the conversation proceeded.
In fact, at one point when Bauderina attempted to break off the discus-
sion so that the participants could go to lunch, Tito remarked, “Not
yet, I still have more I want to talk about.”
21. As the lunch began Tito was, again, quiet and detached. But
as the conversation turned to reminiscences he showed an increasingly
lively interest and a keen sense of humor.
Eagleburger

Yugoslavia
257.
Memorandum From Robert Hunter of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, August 22, 1978
SUBJECT
FMS Credits for Arms Sales to Yugoslavia
In authorizing moderate expansion of our arms transfer relation-
ship with Yugoslavia last September, the President specifically
excluded FMS credits.2
There are now indications that the Yugoslavs will ask for limited
FMS financing (State estimates no more than $10 million in FY 1980).
The State Department memorandum at Tab II3 asks for a decision
in principle to permit such financing—while understanding the limited
funds available and the need for Congressional consultations. (Normal
budget procedures would still have to be followed.) State argues that
the prospects for selling two $10 million-plus systems (unspecified)
would be enhanced if the authority were available; and that our ability
to respond positively on the financing question would enhance the fall
visit here of the Yugoslav Defense Minister. It would improve our ties
to the military, and underline our commitment to post-Tito Yugoslavia.
State argues that the limitation on credits was placed in the Presi-
dential Decision because we did not expect to be asked. I recall that
we also wanted to keep the program low-key, in view of the still-
tentative nature of our improving relations.
Now, however, I agree it would be valuable to take this extra
step. This does not seem to be sufficiently important to require the
President’s personal approval.4
Defense and ACDA agree with the State memo.
Recommendation:
That you concur with the extension of FMS financing to Yugoslavia
in principle, and sign the memorandum at Tab I.5
action. Jessica Tuchman Mathews concurred.
3 Not attached.
4 Inderfurth wrote “DR information only?” in the margin. Aaron replied “Yes”
underneath.
5 Aaron wrote “I agree” and signed for Brzezinski an August 22 memorandum to
Vance, informing the Department of State of the recommendation to permit the extension
of FMS financing for Yugoslav arms transfers. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs,
Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Country Chron File, Box 57, Yugoslavia:

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
258.
Memorandum of Conversation1
SUBJECT
Secretary Brown’s Plenary Meeting with Yugoslav Defense Secretary Ljubicic
PARTICIPANTS
Yugoslavia
Federal Secretary for National Defense, General of the Army Ljubicic
Ambassador to the US Belovski
ColGen Kadenic, Chief of Center of High Military Schools
LtColGen Kadejevic, Chief of the Department for Education and Training
MajGen Popovic, Chief of the Department for Procurement of Armament and
Military Equipment
Col Popovic, Interpreter
Col Vuckovic, Military, Air and Naval Attache
US
The Secretary
Under Secretary for Policy Resor
Assistant Secretary (ISA) McGiffert
Deputy Assistant Secretary (Eur & NATO) Siena
LTG Graves, Director, DSAA
MG Bowman, Director, European & NATO Affairs
RADM Hanson, Military Assistant to the Secretary
Mr. Babione, OUSDR&E
Mr. Bader, Deputy Director, European & NATO Affairs
Col Roche, Defense Attache, Belgrade
Mr. Guild, DSAA Assistant for Yugoslavia
Cdr McVadon, ISA Assistant for Yugoslavia
After warmly renewing acquaintances, Secretary Brown asked Gen-
eral Ljubicic to assess the last year of the relationship and suggested
that this was also a time for progress. General Ljubicic said he welcomed
this visit, his first to the US; and characterized Brown’s 1977 visit to
Belgrade as contributing not only to military cooperation but also to
all fields of US-Yugoslav relations.2 (During his toast at dinner that
evening he invited Brown back to Belgrade.) He said the visit by General
Jones in May was very helpful and visits like it permit US officers to
see the “Yugoslav reality” and to meet senior Yugoslav officers. Ljubicic
recalled that he and Brown said in Belgrade that the military relation-
Drafted by McVadon on October 2; approved by Siena on October 10. The meeting took
place at the Pentagon.
2 See Document 246.

Yugoslavia
ship could not expand to its fullest overnight, but he said there has
been progress.
Brown acknowledged the value of personal visits, but noted that
Yugoslavia’s specific requests for military equipment were a very
important aspect of the improving relationship. He said that in response
to Yugoslav requests the USG has given approval except when there
were overriding policy considerations, such as the involvement of sensi-
tive technology. Brown stressed that the US favored this cooperation
for political and military reasons, not for economic benefits. He
explained that he believed an independent, unified and strong Yugo-
slavia contributed to world peace.
Ljubicic stated firmly that Yugoslavia would remain independent
and nonaligned and was a factor contributing to the stability of the
balance of power in that area of the world. He cited signs of unrest
between the big powers and said that deterioration of US-Soviet
relations affected Yugoslavia. Yugoslavs, he said, did not want the
balance upset. He expressed confidence in US statements supporting
a strong and nonaligned Yugoslavia, but noted that we must be con-
cerned with the details that make it so. (This is the closest Ljubicic
came to a complaint about US reluctance to release certain weapons
to Yugoslavia. He left the complaining to a member of his entourage;
and even that separate meeting of MG Popovic and LTG Graves lacked
the expected polemics. Popovic renewed the requests for all equipment
which had been denied, reviewed the status of many current actions,
and expanded their shopping list moderately. He added, inter alia,
requests for consultations and information on Stinger, Viper, hydrofoil
vessels, and postgraduate and specialists training in armaments, muni-
tions and quality control fields.) Ljubicic described a “distrust” of the
US in Yugoslavia because Yugoslavs have known pressure from both
sides; the distrust should be eliminated because good relations were
sought sincerely, not for “technical” reasons.
Brown acknowledged that US-Soviet relations were central to many
situations in the world. He commented that “everyone says he is peace-
loving,” but that US actions have shown that we have sought independ-
ence and stability for all nations. US relations with Yugoslavia were
important regardless of the nature of US-Soviet relations, Brown
explained. He said that a secure Yugoslavia was important not only
as a matter of friendship but also for self-interest. Brown pointed out
that steady improvement in the relationship was the goal and that the
“wild swings” of the past should not recur. Brown reflected that a
secure Yugoslavia would have the effect of improving relations
between Yugoslavia and its neighbors.
Ljubicic
then
described unfavorable
aspects
of
Yugoslavia’s
relations with its neighbors. He said relations with Greece were declin-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
ing, although Yugoslavia had no territorial dispute with Greece, only
a desire that the Macedonian minority in Greece have the same rights
as other Greek citizens. (This unexpected revelation could have been
a sop to Ambassador Belovski—a Macedonian—who was beside Ljubi-
cic or as a preface to comments later in the visit indicating concern
about possible establishment of a NATO headquarters in Greece.)
Ljubicic said the Italian government failed to curb the increasingly
active opponents of the recent Italian-Yugoslav agreement on borders.
He complained of Italian troops disposed toward Yugoslavia, of their
intercepts of Yugoslav military communications, and of Italians “enter-
ing into” Yugoslav military communications. Ljubicic characterized it
as a small quarrel between neighbors, but said there was no reason
for Italy and Austria to do this. He said greater cooperation with
Austria, Greece and Italy were sought and that the Yugoslavs were
ready to offer proof that there is no reason for suspicion. He then
described the dispute with West Germany over the issue of extradition
of the captured terrorists. Turning to the US, he noted Yugoslav appreci-
ation for US attitudes on Yugoslavia and the contacts and communica-
tions between President Carter and Tito. He said this diminished dis-
trust, but some forces existed in the US which could undertake actions
against Yugoslavia under some conditions.
Brown reaffirmed Ljubicic’s appraisal of the Carter-Tito contacts
and said Carter had sought Tito’s advice in delicate situations. He
agreed on the value of cooperation in countering terrorism. He said
that a recent conversation with the Italian Minister of Defense3 con-
vinced him that the Italians wished to cooperate in countering terrorists.
He expressed the belief that the Greeks had no fear of a military threat
from a strong Yugoslavia. Brown reflected that some residue of distrust
existed from earlier decades, but that it was decreasing and should not
be important for the future.
Ljubicic said that Stane Dolanc would visit Greece to clarify ques-
tions and establish normal relations. He told Brown that he appreciated
Brown’s views on Italy and Greece and that he would invite the Italian
and Greek defense ministers to Yugoslavia. Regarding electronic recon-
naissance, he said, smiling, that the US should provide the devices to
Yugoslavia so they could listen.
3 Italian Minister of Defense Attilio Ruffini traveled to Washington September 11–
12 to sign an MOU on defense procurement at the Pentagon. Ruffini met with Brown on
September 11, and discussed the need for greater industrial collaboration, improvement
of community relations where bases are located, and assistance for security services.
Policy File, D780388–0266)

Yugoslavia
Brown said that curiosity was universal, and that if countries stayed
away from other countries territories, listening need not be seen as
unfriendly.
Ljubicic, with a serious expression, said that Yugoslavia would not
use such equipment to conduct reconnaissance against these countries.
He then said that, if the Soviet Union were excluded from the Middle
East, Soviet efforts would be more intense in areas around Yugoslavia.
He suggested that already the Soviets somehow were behind Bulgarian
actions that irritate Yugoslavia.
Brown said that Yugoslavia’s military needs were recognized and
asked about the status of the evaluation of the TF–30 engine for possible
use in the Yugoslav Eagle aircraft. Ljubicic recited the history of the
Yugoslav request for a high technology engine (but gave no hint on the
progress or possible outcome of the evaluation). He said that Yugoslav
experts should come to the US as part of the evaluation, because, if
the engine were selected, the US and Yugoslavia would need to enter
into large-scale cooperation. In response to a question from Brown on
the type of cooperation he had in mind, Ljubicic said, if the TF–30 suits
their needs, they would like to build it. They would purchase several
engines, and then buy the license and documentation to permit produc-
tion in Yugoslavia with US assistance. Brown, in questioning further
whether the Yugoslavs were suggesting that they produce the entire
engine themselves, explained that some components were difficult to
make and that there were difficulties with US policy. He said there
were many components which the US would consider for Yugoslav
manufacture and that assembly and testing of the engine could be
considered. He explained that even these possibilities would require
careful review in the USG and an exception to policy which only
the President could grant. Brown asked that Ljubicic put together the
specifics of their request for consideration by the USG.
Ljubicic asked if the group from Yugoslavia could have all the data
on the engine, whether anything is secret. Brown said all information
would be made available. (Senior Defense Security Assistance Agency
representatives explained later to General Popovic and Major Stanko-
vic, the assistant attache who deals with FMS, that requests for informa-
tion beyond the limits of the present export licenses must be submitted
to the Department of State for USG consideration, but that the answers
would be given as quickly as possible.)
Brown said the USG would have to see how many components
could be manufactured in Yugoslavia. He said that turbine blades were
very difficult to make. Ljubicic said that the Yugoslavs were making
turbine blades with the British, who are satisfied with Yugoslav prac-
tices. Ljubicic said that entering into arrangements for production of
the Orao II aircraft—not just the engine—would open up a big field

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
and produce a significant increase in bilateral cooperation. Brown did
not answer this point, but noted that the group of Yugoslav aircraft
engine experts was to arrive soon and that he wanted to press forward
for the present with that aspect of the TF–30 question.
Brown said he wished to know the GOY decision on the US proposal
for a joint US-Yugoslav Defense Working Group. He recalled that they
(Brown and Ljubicic) had met twice with a year’s interval. He suggested
that more frequent meeting of the staffs could lead to progress, but
would not substitute for meeting between the Secretaries. The Defense
Working Group would promote cooperation in areas requiring atten-
tion to detail. Ljubicic replied, “We fully accept your suggestion to
establish this commission.” Experience with other countries had been
successful with groups headed at the “assistant state secretary” level,
or at the level the US side wished, he explained. He said the group
could meet when necessary, but at least once a year, with the first
meeting in Belgrade, or in Washington if the US wished. Brown said
that the first meeting should be in Belgrade before the end of the year.
Ljubicic said, “I quite agree.”
Brown raised the subject of disposal of old US-origin military equip-
ment. He explained that the USG has decided that Yugoslavia need
not purchase the reversionary rights on MAP equipment. This decision,
he continued, meant also that the USG need not ask other countries
receiving US MAP if they were interested before allowing Yugoslavia
to dispose of the equipment. He emphasized that a written request to
the USG was required before the GOY disposed of the equipment.
Ljubicic said that the Yugoslavs were grateful to the USG and people
for the MAP equipment and that he was satisfied with the “solution”
just explained. He said Yugoslavia made one mistake: “the tanks to
Ethiopia.” He speculated that if they had asked maybe more could
have been given to Ethiopia. Belovski laughingly interjected, “Jointly!”
Ljubicic said the equipment was obsolete and plans were to scrap it.
Brown noted that his remarks on equipment disposal were not a criti-
cism, only an explanation of procedures. Ljubicic assured him that the
Yugoslavs did not want to cause problems with the US Congress or
anyone else.
Brown asked if Ljubicic had other things to raise. Ljubicic said he
would not burden Brown with the long list of equipment requested
(Brown agreed the list was very long); however, he (Ljubicic) had a
few questions. He asked about rocket fuels and explosives. Brown said
he thought the Thiokol and Octogene problems had been resolved.
Ljubicic said that Admiral Mamula, the chief of their navy, would come
to the US at the “beginning of next year” to clarify navy needs. Brown
said he would be very welcome. Assistant Secretary McGiffert reminded
Ljubicic of an October deadline for the Sparrow missiles associated with

Yugoslavia
the antiship missile defense system. Ljubicic said they were interested in
rockets fired from submarines (probably reference to ASROC).4 Brown
mentioned again that production will stop on the version of the Spar-
row missile which has been offered. Ljubicic said they would like to have
an Air Force team visit Yugoslavia to discuss air-to-ground missiles.
He said his longest list of items is in the field of electronics but that
could be discussed by General Popovic and his counterpart.
Brown proposed that they adjourn, but Ljubicic said he wanted to
explain their position on credits. He said they would not ask for “state
credits”; if credit were necessary, commercial credit would be obtained
for individual items purchased from individual firms. If credit were
not available, he said, they would pay cash. Brown recalled that in the
discussions in Belgrade credits had been prohibited but that now the
policy had been changed so modest credits for Yugoslavia could be
sought from Congress for the next fiscal year. He said that if commercial
credits were preferred, however, the US would not press a government
loan on them. Ljubicic said this question had been decided in Belgrade,
but that, if bigger arrangements were entered into, they would reconsi-
der. Brown said they would talk more about the loan question at lunch,
and the meeting ended. (The question was not raised at lunch, but
Major General Bowman raised the issue several days later. Ambassador
Belovski took the lead in responding and said it was not worth the
effort this year; they would wait until they really needed some money.)5
4 Anti-submarine rocket (ASROC) is an all-weather, all sea conditions, anti-subma-
rine rocket.
ant Secretary of Defense for European and NATO Affairs James Siena and Assistant
Federal Secretary of National Defense for the Military-Economic Sector Colonel General
Dusan Vujatvic. The two agreed on a memorandum of understanding on the formation
of the Joint Committee for Military-Economic and Scientific-Technical Cooperation in
the Field of Military Technique and discussed several weapons systems the Yugoslav
military expressed interest in. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material,
Europe, USSR, and East/West, Larrabee Subject File, Box 68, Yugoslavia: Military:

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
259.
Memorandum From Robert Putnam of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, November 2, 1978
SUBJECT
Intelligence Exchanges with Yugoslavia—Possible VBB Lunch Topic
Yugoslav Defense Minister Ljubicic raised the issue of military
intelligence exchanges with Harold Brown during their private talks
in September.2 Brown agreed, and said we would follow up through
intelligence channels. The intelligence side of DOD is now reviewing
the problems this would pose and some in OSD are known to be a bit
skeptical. (We have already asked that the matter be referred to you
before any final decisions are taken.) This memorandum suggests a
course of action for moving ahead with an appropriately cautious
policy on these exchanges.
The benefits of the exchanges would be primarily political:
—We can demonstrate support for Yugoslav efforts to remain inde-
pendent of Soviet advances
—We might expand our contacts with the Yugoslav military, which
could be useful in the post-Tito period.
—We might gain otherwise unavailable useful intelligence, if the
exchanges are genuinely mutual.
The risks, to which some in OSD call particular attention, involve
military and intelligence considerations:
—The likelihood of KGB penetration of the GOY means that any
information we pass is likely to surface in Moscow.
—Therefore, we cannot give the Yugoslavs any really useful
information.
—Therefore, we are unlikely to get any useful information in
return.3
Bartholomew.
2 On October 7, the Department notified the Embassy in Belgrade of the issues that
came up in private discussions between Secretary Brown and Yugoslav National Defense
Minister Ljubicic including the Yugoslav idea of intelligence sharing between the two
countries. The Department informed the Embassy that Brown had agreed to “exchanges
of information on the Soviets and said we would follow up through intelligence chan-
Policy File, D780411–0986)
3 Aaron highlighted the three points above and wrote on the margin: “ZB—No
worse than an exchange with the FRG.”

Yugoslavia
We need also to reflect on probable Yugoslav motives and possible
Soviet reactions.
The relevant NSC staffers (Hoskinson, Hunter, Thomson) are
inclined to believe that these exchanges might be constructed in a way
that would minimize exposure of sources and methods, while offering
the prospect of significant political benefits. Ambassador Eagleburger
says his only concern is “with how we proceed, not whether we should
do so”, but he urges great caution and careful political supervision.
(His views are in a cable at Tab A.)4
Because this issue involved balancing political, military, and intelli-
gence interests, it needs eventually to be addressed in an interagency
forum that can review all aspects, not just the intelligence issues.
Because bureaucratically, the action at the moment is with the Deputy
Undersecretary for Policy (Intelligence), normal NSC–ISA channels are
not adequate for addressing the problem.
Therefore, I recommend that you raise this issue directly with
Harold Brown, preferably at a VBB luncheon.
You could tell Brown that:
—in principle, you endorse his offer to Ljubicic.
—you understand there may be some intelligence reservations
about the nature of the proposed exchanges.
—we need to factor in the political implications before making a
judgment about how to proceed.
—once DOD has had a chance to prepare the groundwork, it might
be useful to have interagency consideration of how to implement the
offer.
You could ask Brown to have Resor convene—or offer to have the
NSC convene—a small interagency working group with representa-
tives from State, CIA, NSC, and the relevant offices in DOD. Working
from the DOD paper, this group would draw up guidelines for the
exchanges that would minimize exposure of sources and methods,
while maximizing the political and intelligence returns to the U.S.
(Hoskinson is a bit skeptical about the need for an interagency group
and feels you may simply wish to review the eventual DOD decision
yourself.) You might also want to touch base with Admiral Turner.5
“about what the Yugoslavs really intend” and nervousness about moving too far too
fast as the military relationship was still in its infancy. “If the Yugoslavs really want
formally to exchange (emphasis on exchange) intelligence information on the Soviets,”
he argued, “then they are even more uncertain of their Eastern Big Brother than I had
thought.” Although he agreed that the Departments of State and Defense should pursue
Ljubicic’s offer, Eagleburger urged that the approach “be supervised at the political level
in State and DOD (and, it goes without saying, this Embassy).” (Carter Library, National
Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Country Chron File, Box 57,
5 Aaron wrote on the bottom of the page “ZB—You should ask Resor to contact
me on this & I can work it out with our staff & State with or without a mtg.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
Recommendation
That you speak to Harold Brown, Cy Vance (beginning at a VBB
lunch), plus Stan Turner, about setting up an interagency working
group to review plans for intelligence exchanges with Yugoslavia.6
6 Brzezinski did not check either box. At the November 3 VBB lunch, Vance, Brown,
and Brzezinski agreed that Defense should coordinate with Newsom on responding to
the Yugoslavs. (Department of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Cyrus R. Vance—
November 7 memorandum to Aaron, Putnam provided a scenario on how the interde-
partmental coordination among Aaron, Resor, and Newsom would work for setting up
a policy recommendation on the subject. Putnam also recommended that the DCI be
informed either by Aaron or Brzezinski as “the DCI is apparently acting on the assumption
that he is a player on this issue.” Aaron approved the scenario, and suggested that
Putnam get Carlucci involved. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material,
260.
Memorandum From the Deputy to the Director of Central
Intelligence for Collection Tasking ([name not declassified])
to Director of Central Intelligence Turner1
Washington, November 17, 1978
SUBJECT
Yugoslav Intelligence Exchange
1. Action Requested: For your review and consideration of the recom-
mendation provided in Paragraph 7 below.
2. Background:
a. In a 26 September meeting with Secretary Brown, Yugoslav
Defense Minister Ljubicic raised the possibility of a US-Yugoslav intelli-
gence exchange on the Soviet Union. The Secretary agreed in principle,
having been alerted in advance that the matter might be surfaced.
Secretary Brown subsequently accepted your offer to undertake an
assessment of the pros and cons of such an exchange. This memoran-
dum, therefore, provides some background, addresses the relevant
slavia. Secret. Sent via the Deputy Director of Central Intelligence.

Yugoslavia
issues, discusses the options available to you, and makes a recommen-
dation for further action. Attached are some biographic sketches of the
key Yugoslav players.
b. There is some precedent for an intelligence exchange with the
Yugoslavs:
—Following Yugoslavia’s expulsion from the Cominform in 1948,
a program of exchange of military intelligence was developed between
the United States and the Yugoslav Defense Ministry. This arrangement
was cancelled by the Yugoslavs in August 1955 as a result of Belgrade’s
normalized relations with Moscow.
—[1 paragraph (13 lines) not declassified]
—On 29 August 1968, following upon the Soviet invasion of
Czechoslovakia, Secretary Rusk told the Yugoslav Ambassador that
the US was closely watching the situation and offered to check out any
information that the Yugoslavs developed regarding a Soviet build-up
of forces. A few days later, a senior Yugoslav official in Belgrade did
request confirmation of reported Soviet moves. When the US Embassy
responded with a summary of information on Soviet deployments in
Hungary and Bulgaria, an offer was made to provide more detail. The
Yugoslavs demurred, saying that they would prefer to continue to
exchange information as they had in this instance. The State Depart-
ment does not equate this arrangement [1 line not declassified]. From
were responsive to queries from their US counterparts, which may be
attributed to individual rapport at certain posts. US-Yugoslav differ-
ences over arms sales and the Toth affair (American convicted by the
Yugoslavs for alleged espionage) may have contributed to the cessation
of this limited cooperation, but there was no specific word on the
subject from the Yugoslavs.
—On 4 October 1978, coincident to the Yugoslav approach regard-
ing an intelligence exchange, the Department of State provided the
Yugoslav Foreign Ministry with an assessment of the Soviet leader-
ship.2 This stemmed from a proposal by Ambassador Eagleburger to
Rajko Knezevic, Director of the Office for Eastern Europe in the Foreign
Ministry, that the US and Yugoslavia exchange information on the
Soviet leadership and was made in response to Knezevic’s expression of
tion with Knezevic at a reception in Belgrade. After hearing from Knezevic of the “GOY’s
‘serious’ concern about what is going on in Moscow,” Eagleburger reported his offer to
the Yugoslav official for an “exchange of views about what is going on in Moscow among

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
Yugoslav concern with this question.3 Subsequently, a Foreign Ministry
official (Budimir Loncar) advised the Ambassador that the information
provided had received close attention and that he would discuss the
paper “privately” with him some day soon.4
3. Considerations:
a. One factor in considering a resumed intelligence exchange is a
determination of what the US could provide and what the US is likely
to receive in return:
[2 paragraphs (40 lines) not declassified]
b. There are other factors to be considered beyond the potential
intelligence value. One is the possible improvement in US-Yugoslav
relations in that an exchange would signal a positive US attitude. In
the over-all context of US-Yugoslav relations, however, such an
exchange may not loom large in Yugoslavia’s estimation compared to
matters such as arms sales or the Joint Defense Working Group now
being established. On the other hand, it was Ljubicic who raised the
issue. Another possible advantage to the US is the useful contacts that
would be developed within the Yugoslav military establishment from
which we might benefit in more troubled times. Also, US-provided
information might sharpen the Yugoslav perception of the Soviet threat.
Finally, a Soviet perception of closer ties might act as a deterrent to
precipitous Soviet actions against Yugoslavia.
c. Against this possible benefit to the US are the potentially negative
factors to be considered: Key among these is the security implications
since it would be through a “leak” that other negative factors would
be operative. Utmost care would be required to make certain that
intelligence passed to the Yugoslavs would not in fact divulge sources
and methods. While the Yugoslavs are not likely to provide the USSR
with any information, a Soviet penetration of the Yugoslav government
cannot be ruled out. [2 lines not declassified]
—Another security aspect is that in passing intelligence require-
ments to the Yugoslavs, the US would tend to reveal its intelligence
gaps.
with the Department’s analysis on the situation in Moscow. (National Archives, RG 59,
Central Foreign Policy File, D780403–0615)
4 Eagleburger briefed Loncar on October 4 on the substance of the information
provided by the Department on October 2. On October 18, following a discussion on
other issues, Eagleburger noted that “Loncar took me aside out of earshot of his North
American desk assistant to say that the info we provided [on October 4] is extremely
interesting and has received close attention. As a next step in the process, Loncar said
he would see me ‘privately’ some day soon to discuss the paper.” While unsure if the
Yugoslavs “will give us more than the map coordinates for Moscow,” Eagleburger
undertook to tell Loncar that “we hope the exercise can be repeated from time to time.”
Policy File, D780436–0800)

Yugoslavia
—Should any intelligence exchange arrangement be surfaced to
the USSR, moreover, it could result in a Soviet estimate of greater
US-Yugoslav collusion and result in a negative Soviet attitude with
unpredictable effects but possibly including Soviet efforts toward
destabilization in Yugoslavia in the post-Tito period beyond those
which the USSR may now contemplate. Such a concern would weigh
heavily in Yugoslav consideration of undertaking the exchange agree-
ment and may, in fact, limit the degree of that exchange.
—It also must be noted that the Yugoslav intelligence service is
believed to engage in acts of assassination against Croatian elements
around the world. At a time when the US is fostering the ideal of
human rights, a new arrangement, if it became known, would appear
to be in contradiction to that ideal.
—Also not to be overlooked is the unknown motivation behind this
Yugoslav initiative and the possibility that the Yugoslavs subsequently
could cite this arrangement to their own advantage.
d. On balance, it probably would be to the advantage of the US
to participate in an intelligence exchange with Yugoslavia. Such an
exchange would provide an opportunity to obtain intelligence difficult
to gain from any other source. Moreover, an intelligence exchange
might benefit US foreign policy interests. This is a determination, how-
ever, which others should address. From an intelligence point of view,
we see no overriding obstacles providing that the exchange arrange-
ment is closely monitored.
4. Modality of Exchange: We would agree with Ambassador
Eagleburger’s assessment that the arrangement for any intelligence
exchange is of particular importance.
a. [4 lines not declassified]
b. Belgrade would be the preferred locale for the exchange and the
DAO the logical instrument to effect it. Such an arrangement would
have the advantage of postponing immediate decisions on what to
provide by referring the question to Washington. Specific actions would
be required before release of information:
—The originating agency should approve the release of any of its
reports used as a basis for information to be passed.
—NFAC and DIA should make an assessment of the net gain to
be derived in providing the general type of information that would
be passed.
—The US Ambassador in Belgrade should have final approving
authority on the passing of specific information.
—Approval should be obtained from national-level authorities of
both countries to insure that information exchanged has highest level
official sanction.
—Intelligence exchanges should be conducted on a reciprocal basis.
c. Long term commitments should not be made and the exchange
arrangements should be continued only as long as they prove to be in
the best interests of the US.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
d. [5 lines not declassified]
5. Options: In light of the above considerations, several options
are available:
a. Advise the State and Defense Departments that from an intelli-
gence point of view there is no objection to an intelligence exchange
providing that arrangements for such an exchange assure the protection
of sources and methods, as above.
b. Advise those Departments that the intelligence value to be gained
from such an exchange could be offset by the potential disadvantages,
including security implications, which would weigh against entering
into such an agreement.
c. Advise the concerned Departments that preliminary findings
suggest that there could be a substantial intelligence advantage to be
derived from an exchange, that we have no objections if sources and
methods are protected, and that larger foreign policy considerations
should be the subject of NSC consideration.
6. Staff Position: This memorandum has been coordinated with
NFAC, the Operations Directorate and the State and Defense Depart-
ments, as well as with the NSC Staff.
7. Recommendation: Accept Option “c” to ensure full consideration
of the problem and policy-level support of any intelligence exchange
that develops.5
5 Turner approved this recommendation on November 20 and wrote on the bottom
of the last page: “Another advantage, and one that dominates my thinking, is that we
will establish mil-to-mil contacts that may prove invaluable in post-Tito period. Stan.”

Yugoslavia
261.
Memorandum for the Record1
SUBJECT
First Meeting of the US-Yugoslav Joint Committee for Military-Economic and
Scientific-Technical Cooperation in the Field of Military Technique
PARTICIPANTS
United States
Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense James V. Siena, US Chairman
Deputy Assistant Secretary of State Richard Vine
MG John R.D. Cleland, Vice Director, J–5, OJCS
MG Richard C. Bowman, Director, European and NATO Affairs, OASD/ISA
RADM Taylor Brown, Deputy Director, International Programs, OUSDR&E
Mr. Richard Violette, Director of Operations, DSAA
Mr. Harry Dunlop, Political Counselor, Embassy Belgrade
Colonel William Roche, Defense Attache, Embassy Belgrade
Mr. Irwin Pernick, PM/SAS, State
Commander Eric McVadon, Assistant for Yugoslavia, OASD/ISA
Yugoslavia
Assistant Secretary of Defense for the Military Economy Colonel General Dusan
Vujatovic
Mr. Mitrovic, FSFA (11 December only)
MG Sveta Popovic, Head, Department of Procurement of Armament and
Military Equipment
Mr. Mirko Zaric (position not given)
Colonel Bozidar Ilic, Army
Colonel Vladimir Gabaj, Navy technical matters
Colonel Vrbica, Army
Colonel Vid Voh, Air Force
Colonel Djordje Jaukovic, Air Force procurement
Colonel Raicevic, Navy technical matters
Captain Petar Krunic, Navy
(Other unidentified military officers sat in from time to time)
(S) This memorandum supplements the attached minutes provided
by the Yugoslav Federal Secretariat of National Defense and received
in March 1979.2 It includes only those items that may be of reference
value for future Committee proceedings or for determining better the
precise nature of Yugoslav military equipment requests.
First plenary session:
Drafted by McVadon on April 7, 1979; approved by McVadon.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
—Colonel General Vujatovic, the Yugoslav chairman, recalled that
the initiative for forming the Committee came from Ambassador
Eagleburger speaking for the USG.3 He observed that in the exchanges
of draft documents neither government had seen a need to change
the essence (of what was to become the final draft MOU). Vujatovic
commented on the roles of the Federal Secretariats for National Defense
and Foreign Affairs (FSND & FSFA) in preparing the Yugoslav MOU-
related documents, but he stated (rather pointedly it seemed, consider-
ing the presence of the FSFA representative) that once the document
was agreed upon, the work would be done by the FSND, and that the
composition for the future of the Yugoslav side would depend on the
nature of the work of the Committee and the matters to be discussed.
—In further introductory remarks, General Vujatovic said that
there was a great need for the Yugoslavs to update weapons and
equipment. They have strived, he said, to develop resources to build
for themselves as much as they can, starting with small arms and some
light weapons. For the most sophisticated equipment they must rely
on foreign suppliers, with an effort to obtain, “frankly, as much disper-
sion as possible,” even with the technical problems that diversity of
origin produces. He recalled oscillation in the military supply relation-
ship with the US and said that he had heard criticism of excessive
Yugoslav reliance on the Soviets. However, those complaining had not
offered alternatives. He said that his government understood that the
US was ready to support and supply Yugoslavia, “as Yugoslavia is
today.” One facet of that US support was readiness to discuss “trade
in arms and equipment.” He hoped that complaints of too much from
the Soviet Union could be overcome. He recalled that there were US
fears that technology or weapons would be transferred to someone
else, but that had happened only once, to Ethiopia—a transfer that was
not harmful to the US, in the Yugoslav view. He alluded, without
elaborating, to American “suspicions” that “would be overcome in
the talks.”
General Vujatovic said that to a large extent US and Yugoslav
interests were common. “The US wishes,” he said, “for Yugoslavia to
3 Eagleburger proposed the creation of a Joint Military Working Group at the same
In a June 14, 1978, memorandum, Hunter informed Brzezinski that “State, Defense, and
Embassy Belgrade propose broaching with the Yugoslavs the idea of setting up a joint
military working group—as we had suggested before the Tito visit.” Hunter, with Les
Denend’s concurrence, recommended that State be allowed to approach the Yugoslavs
with the idea, noting that “the group would not be primarily concerned with arms
sales—though that might come up.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski
Material,
Brzezinski
Office
File,
Country
Chron
File,
Box
57,
Yugoslavia:
mendation on June 16. (Ibid.)

Yugoslavia
remain as it is.” There should be no apprehension or misgivings, and
Yugoslav defenses should be strengthened. He stressed that arms are
not a subject for grant or aid, but for “normal economic relations.”
—Deputy Assistant Secretary Siena, the US chairman, responded
that the presence of the US delegation reflected a growing beneficial
relationship between the two countries, based on mutual interests and
respect. He said that the US respected Yugoslavia’s position and
recalled SecDef’s remarks to Secretary Ljubicic concerning Yugoslav
independence, territorial integrity and national unity. Our efforts in
the security field, he said, were directed toward that policy.
—In outlining the US view of the Committee, Mr. Siena described
it as a forum for regular contacts and a way to avoid the regrettable
previous oscillations, but not as a replacement for established proce-
dures. The Committee would review those established procedures to
see how they were working.
After describing briefly the importance of the US Congress in the
matter of arms transfers, Mr. Siena explained that US policies regarding
sensitive technology transfer, coproduction and third-country transfers
were an effort by President Carter to introduce worldwide some meas-
ure of restraint. He said that we were engaged in an effort to reconcile
those policies with the US desire to assist Yugoslavia, and that the
reconciliation would not always please the Yugoslavs. Mr. Siena asked
General Vujatovic to accept that when unfavorable decisions were
taken they were not a consequence of suspicion, but rather from trying
to balance the relationship with the other policies to which he had
referred.
—Mr. Siena and General Vujatovic agreed at this early point in
the meetings that there were no problems in the substance of the draft
MOU, that a working group would be named for further drafting, and
that the agreed MOU would be initialed by the two of them in Belgrade,
with subsequent formal approval by both governments later. Some
items in the MOU were discussed:
—Regarding the frequency of the Joint Committee meetings, Mr.
Siena said that although the US had suggested meeting twice a year
to keep close to the problems, annual sessions and a provision for
extraordinary sessions took care of that concern.
—Mr. Siena explained that to get USG agreement, the MOU should
state explicitly that Committee actions would be governed by national
policies, as well as national legislation. General Vujatovic said that
his legal people contended that there were no policies not backed by
legislation. The problems of finding mutually satisfactory wording was
left to the working group. (Comment: The final draft of the MOU used
the words “national legislation, regulations and procedures.”)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
—In response to a question, General Vujatovic explained that the
Yugoslav use of the term “military-economic” included production,
licensing, coproduction, technical training, etc. The working group was
tasked to ensure that the MOU language made this meaning clear and
precluded confusion with the broader meaning in English of the word
“economic.”
—Addressing another concern we voiced, Major General Popovic
confirmed that the Committee would not replace existing procedures
and channels for the handling of arms sales requests in either country.
(Comment: The final draft of the MOU said the Committee would
“review and follow-up development of the . . . cooperation between
the two countries and the requests and orders placed by the authorities
of one side to another . . . .”)
—General Vujatovic sought and received confirmation that the US
SECRET classification for the MOU meant that the material would not
be made available in the US to the public or the press. Mr. Siena
explained that it would be necessary to notify the Congress on a classi-
fied basis of the MOU and that proposed major weapons sales over
$7M must be reported to the Congress. That notice to Congress would
be public. General Vujatovic asked if it were possible simply to divide
the sale into, for example, ten contracts of $6M each; and Mr. Siena
told him that was not possible. General Vujatovic said that Yugoslav
law prohibited the publication of such information and that purchases
had been made from the UK, France and Sweden without publication
of the information. (Comment: The final draft MOU says that when
Congressional notification of a proposed sale is necessary that the two
governments “will agree how to proceed and will agree on the security
classification of the proposed sale.”)
—Mr. Siena noted that provisions in the US draft concerning the
transfer of technical data had been very carefully developed and were
words with which the USG was very comfortable. General Vujatovic
replied that the Yugoslav draft retained the essence and the working
group could agree on a text. (Comment: This is the section on which
we have recently approached the GOY, at ACDA’s insistence asking
that language be added to explicitly prohibit unauthorized third-coun-
try transfers of items produced from US-origin data and technical
information.
—General Vujatovic and Mr. Siena named the members of the
drafting working group. Yugoslavia: MG Popovic, Col. Ilic and Col.
Gabaj. US: MG Bowman, Mr. Violette and Mr. Pernick.
[Omitted here is discussion about specific weapons systems.]

Yugoslavia
262.
Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance to
President Carter1
Washington, January 2, 1979
SUBJECT
Request for an Arms Transfer Policy Exception for a Jet Engine for Yugoslavia
I. ISSUE
The Government of Yugoslavia (GOY) has requested United States
Government approval to explore with Pratt & Whitney Aircraft (P&W)
the co-production and assembly of the TF30–P–414 jet engine in Yugo-
slavia. Such an arrangement would require that you authorize an excep-
tion to the arms transfer policy of May 19, 1977 on the grounds that
approval of the program will promote our national security interests.
II. DISCUSSION
The US has been seeking to build more durable relations with
Yugoslavia in anticipation of the post-Tito era. Our success depends
upon our ability to establish strong links with the leading individuals
and institutions, key among which is the Yugoslav military.
The Yugoslavs produce about 75 percent of their military needs.
For the remainder, which includes nearly all sophisticated equipment,
they depend primarily on the Soviets. The Yugoslavs have been diversi-
fying their sources of supply and have sought to purchase from us a
number of new items. Most important among these would be a new
engine for the Eagle II (Orao II) all-purpose, supersonic fighter aircraft
which Yugoslavia plans to build during the mid-1980s. After several
exchanges with us about which engines might be available for this
plane, the Yugoslavs settled on the P&W TF30. The GOY is also consid-
ering several West European and Soviet Engines.
We authorized P&W to discuss direct sales of the engine with the
GOY, consistent with your approval last year of a moderate expansion
in our arms transfer relationship with Yugoslavia with emphasis on
political impact. The Yugoslavs are very interested in the TF30 but
their decision will depend largely upon our willingness to permit joint
production of the engine; they probably are not interested in a straight
sale. The GOY requests detailed commercial and technical information
regarding both direct purchase and co-production by January 15, 1979.
is not initialed by Vance.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
The GOY plans to produce up to 200 Eagle II’s. P&W estimates
that it would gross, either through direct sale or co-production, an
average of approximately $1.5 million per engine. If the co-production
scheme is approved, the first of the engines would be completed in
1985 and the last around 1988.
Factors for Approval
—Given Yugoslavia’s strategic location, its influence in the Third
World, the eventual post-Tito transition, and Yugoslavia’s determina-
tion to reduce its dependence on the USSR, we should continue to
support its desire to increase cooperation with the West.
—The Yugoslav military is one of the most important all-Yugoslav
institutions in the country and will be a decisive factor in the post-Tito
era. One of our important goals has long been to increase our access
to the military at all levels. Technical assistance to the GOY for TF30
co-production would provide us with a key instrument to pursue this
goal and would tie the Yugoslavs to a Western supply source for years.
—If successful, the TF30/Eagle II program would reduce military
reliance on the USSR—a Yugoslav Air Force objective—and eliminate
Yugoslavia’s total dependence on the Soviets for high performance
aircraft.
—The TF30 is a sophisticated engine but none of its technology
is classified.
—The engine co-production arrangement would be consistent with
our policy not to transfer offensive systems to Yugoslavia.
Factors for Denial
—Current US arms transfer policy, PD/NSC–13, prohibits the
licensed manufacture of significant combat equipment such as the pro-
posed jet engine in non-exempt countries.
—Yugoslavia’s role as a leader and spokesman for the Non-Aligned
Movement has often led the GOY to take positions opposed to ours
in international forums.
—However improved its human rights record may be in recent
years, Yugoslavia has an autocratic, one-party political system with a
strong internal security element andseveral hundred political prisoners.
—Approval of this co-production arrangement could lead to simi-
lar co-production requests from other non-exempt countries more
closely oriented to the West.
Recommendation:
I recommend that you grant an exception to our arms transfer
policy guidelines to authorize the co-production arrangement on the
grounds that it would be in the national security interest of the
United States.

Yugoslavia
To restrict possible retransfer of the engine and to protect its tech-
nology, I further recommend that approval be made subject to the
following written conditions:
1. That third-party transfers of the engine, any of its components,
or technology thereof on the part of Yugoslavia would be prohibited.
2. That development of any advanced versions of the engine involv-
ing technology beyond the level authorized must be approved by the
United States Government prior to initiation.
The Department of Defense and ACDA concur in my recommendation.2
2 Although there is no indication on this copy of the memorandum when Carter
saw and approved it, the Department of State reported the Presidential decision in
Policy File, D790024–0137) The approval of the exception for Yugoslavia leaked to the
press immediately and Aviation Weekly called the White House to seek confirmation of
the story. (Telegram 15555 to Belgrade and Madrid, January 20; National Archives, RG
263.
Memorandum From Robert Hunter and Jim Rentschler of
the National Security Council Staff to the President’s
Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, May 8, 1979
SUBJECT
Aid to Yugoslavia (U)
As you know, Senator Kennedy has introduced legislation2 calling
for $20 million in aid to Yugoslavia after its devastating earthquake3
Albright. Copies were sent to Owen and Mathews.
2 Senator Edward Kennedy (D–Massachusetts) drafted an amendment to the FY
80–81 Development Assistance Authorization Bill, but did not introduce it on the Senate
floor. See footnote 2, Document 264. The text of the amendment, reported by the Depart-
be used by the President for relief and reconstruction assistance to Yugoslavia. (National
Richter Scale struck 15 km from the Montenegro coast causing extensive damage.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
(damage in Montenegro, for example, was equal to a year’s gross
product). In the absence of Administration support—or even com-
ment—the SFRC did not approve it, though Kennedy’s office believes
the SFRC would respond to the Administration, and Kennedy will go
to the floor in any event, where he believes he will get support. It
would not be surprising if our non-response were made an issue on
the Senate floor—a position we should seek to avoid on a humanitarian
At State, Vest and Newsom believe we should support this expendi-
ture; Vance does not, simply on budgetary grounds: i.e. the President’s
desire not to raise the budget. There is also a question about a supple-
mental which Henry Owen flags: at what point does the Congress start
whittling away at other things in the aid field? (C)
Our belief—which Vest shares—is 1) that the Congress will judge
whether or not to set this aid off against other aid appropriations
independently of the position the Administration takes on this item;
and 2) the Yugoslavs will never understand why we refused to support
it. Even a “no comment” will not be understood. Belovski has been
calling around town in support. (C)
In view of the genuine humanitarian purposes—plus the impor-
tance of the Yugoslav relationship—we believe that State’s decision
should be reconsidered. As a result, we recommend that you talk with
Cy Vance, and urge him to give a positive response. (C)
RECOMMENDATION:4
That you call Cy Vance along the above lines. (U)
Yes
No
4 Brzezinski neither approved nor disapproved the recommendation.

Yugoslavia
264.
Telegram From the Embassy in Yugoslavia to the
Department of State1
3453. Subj: Yugoslav Earthquake: Reconstruction Assistance. Ref:
State 111949.2
1. C-entire text
2. It was not too many years ago that I too was struggling with
tight budgets and cursing Ambassadors for their inflated clientitis.
Thus, I have been uncharacteristically reluctant to weigh in on the
debate over what, if any, reconstruction assistance the USG should
provide in the wake of the Montenegrin earthquake. But further silence
only means I am not doing my job.
3. Certain facts are clear:
A. The consequences to the Yugoslav economy of the earthquake,
while not disastrous, will be severe. And this comes at a time when
the Yugoslav economy is already under heavy pressure, with a serious
trade imbalance for the year inevitable, inflationary pressures intense,
investment funds shrinking, and hard currency availabilities greatly
reduced.
B. The earthquake’s effect on Montenegro (Yugoslavia’s poorest
republic), on the other hand, is close to disastrous. Tens of thousands
are, and will remain for months, in temporary shelter; much of the
Republic’s infrastructure (highways, hospitals, schools, water systems,
etc.) has been destroyed or damaged; tourist facilities along the
Montenegrin Adriatic coast are a shambles; industrial facilities through-
out much of the republic have been put out of commission for months
to come.
C. The quick and effective emergency aid provided by the USG
was widely and gratefully noted by people throughout Montenegro
and Yugoslavia. We were compared favorably with others (particularly
the USSR) who reacted slowly or not at all during the emergency phase.
Confidential; Immediate; Limdis.
Senator Pell’s introduction of the Kennedy amendment to the FY80 Aid Authorization
Bill and the discussions on the amendment that ensued including the position of the
administration that it took no position pending a review of Yugoslav needs. The Depart-
ment informed the Embassy that the SFRC concluded discussion on the amendment
with an agreement to wait for the administration’s position, and that “Committee now
considers the ball to be in the administration’s court and that although Kennedy is
prepared to propose amendment on Senate floor, he will not do so without administration

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
D. The Kennedy Amendment received widespread publicity
throughout the country and triggered a second wave of grateful public
and private comment. As a result, substantial US reconstruction assist-
ance is considered by most Yugoslavs, despite our best efforts to the
contrary, to be virtually a fait accompli.
4. These then are the circumstances in which we find ourselves.
Failure to provide any reconstruction assistance in the face of these
facts would inevitably entail some consequences. But I do not want to
exaggerate. If we do no more:
A. It will not mean an immediate deterioration in our bilateral
relationship. The GOY’s interest, at least for now, in close ties with the
US is based on factors of such importance that it will not be seriously
affected by what we do about earthquake assistance.
B. It will not much affect the economic difficulties the Yugoslavs
will face this year, or the rapidity of Montenegrin recovery. Whatever
we might have done would have been so small in comparison with
total needs that the economic impact would have been minimal.
5. The case for providing some help, then, must rest on other
grounds. And most of those grounds are so well known in Washington
that they need not be dwelt on here. They range from the political
arguments about the importance of Yugoslav-US relations in the sensi-
tive period prior to Tito’s passing, through the humanitarian considera-
tions that are so much a part of our makeup, and the fact (well known
here) that Yugoslavia’s neighbors Romania and Italy have been recent
recipients of major US earthquake assistance, to the fact that Yugoslavs
of every variety will simply not understand, after the Kennedy Amend-
ment publicity, what led the USG to oppose (and that is how it will
be seen) giving aid to Montenegro.3
6. But, important as I believe all those arguments to be, there is an
additional factor that I worry about, and Washington ought to worry
about. It is the question of confidence, which is, I recognize, a nebulous
quality. But it will probably prove to be the single most important
element in the minds of the Yugoslav leadership both now and after
Tito as they chart their future course. I find it difficult to believe that
Yugoslav confidence in our ability or willingness to put our money
where our mouth is when the chips are really down will be much
that the administration’s official position with respect to Senator Kennedy’s amendment
was that while the issue had been closely examined in the Department of State and the
administration remained sympathetic to the needs of Yugoslavia and had examined
various alternatives, “none of them seem currently feasible because of budgetary restric-
tions. We will therefore not send up any proposal of our own, but we will not oppose
the initiative of Senator Kennedy.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
File, D790220–0092)

Yugoslavia
enhanced if we refuse now to help in a small way when we have
helped so many others so many other times.
7. I recognize budgetary considerations are an overwhelming prob-
lem and admit that I can do no more than argue that important as they
are, this is more important. While I cannot pull money out of a hat, I
can wonder what ever became of the 35 million dollars in aid funds
previously programmed for Pakistan and suggest that—if a supplemen-
tal is not possible—reprogramming from less essential programs (there
must be some) should at least be considered.
8. Of one thing I am certain. We are presently in the worst possible
posture. We have refused to take a position “pending review of Yugo-
slavia’s needs,” yet, so far as I am aware, no review is underway. Nor
do I believe we should be conducting a review—at least with the
Yugoslavs—so long as there is any question about our willingness to
seek funds when the review is completed. Once we go to the Yugoslavs
for information on their needs they will inevitably assume that we
intend to do something.4
9. So, much as I fear the Department may take me up on it, I
recommend that if we are not going to do anything we tell the Yugo-
slavs precisely that, and soon and in Washington.
Eagleburger
4 On May 16, Eagleburger met with Pesic to discuss possible U.S. long-term recon-
struction assistance. Reporting the conversation in telegram 3697 from Belgrade, May
18, the Embassy noted Pesic’s emphasis on expectations of the Yugoslav public, fueled
by press reports of Senator Kennedy’s amendment, that aid would be made available.
The Embassy reported: “Pesic pointed out great importance of an affirmative U.S. admin-
istration position on aid issue, not only in providing badly needed assistance, but also
in ‘creating the atmosphere’ in which other countries would be making similar decisions.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
265.
Telegram From the Embassy in Yugoslavia to the
Department of State1
4053. For the Acting Secretary Christopher from Ambassador
Eagleburger. Subj: Yugoslav Earthquake: Reconstruction Assistance.
1. (C-entire text)
2. In ref A I argued as persuasively as I could—but apparently not
persuasively enough—for a favorable USG decision on reconstruction
assistance for Yugoslavia in the wake of the Montenegrin earthquake.
In ref B we listed specific schools, hospitals and other public facilities
identified by the GOY as in need of assistance.
3. In ref C I reported that Yugoslav Deputy Secretary for Foreign
Affairs Pesic had come as close to begging for help as a Yugoslav
will ever come. He also asked whether a Montenegrin parliamentary
delegation visit to Washington would be “helpful” in assisting the USG
to make a decision. I have received no response to the Pesic appeal or
question, and still owe him an answer.
4. I have spent two years here trying to build a sense of confidence
and trust in the US so that when the inevitable crisis occurs we will
not be considered irrelevant or impotent, but rather be able to play a
stabilizing role and protect our very considerable political and eco-
nomic interests. Frankly, a decision to provide no assistance—or contin-
ued silence in the face of the Yugoslav appeal—will go a long way to
undercut the psychological progress we have made. Some may think
that was received in the White House Situation Room. The telegram was forwarded by
Rentschler to Brzezinski and Aaron on June 2. In his covering memorandum, Rentschler
wrote that “this ‘Eaglegram’ provides eloquent (nay, de profundis) point to the substance
of our own pitch on behalf of U.S. reconstruction assistance. I think we will be making
a bad mistake if we do not take Eagleburger’s counsel to heart.” (Carter Library, National
Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Country Chron File, Box 57,
the ExIm Bank would be approving a $90 million credit to Yugoslavia for reconstruction.
(Carter Library, Donated Material, Papers of Walter F. Mondale, Box 72, Foreign Coun-
tries–Yugoslavia, (1979))
2 See Document 264.
Yugoslav-provided list of schools and hospitals damaged by the earthquake and in need
of reconstruction assistance. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,

Yugoslavia
that 20 million dollars is too high a price to pay to avoid that, but I
do not.
5. The Pesic conversation introduced an additional consideration:
The GOY fear that if we fail to do anything it will have a major impact
on what others are willing to do. Nor are the Yugoslavs far wrong,
the Canadian Embassy, for example has told us that Ottawa is waiting
to see what “other Western countries” do before it decides whether to
give any economic reconstruction assistance. So, our decision will have
an impact beyond the narrow parameters of what we ourselves are
prepared to do.
6. The forthcoming visit of Mrs. Mondale is yet another new factor.
She is scheduled to visit Montenegro June 14 to meet with senior
Republican officials and tour the coastal region hardest hit by the
earthquake.5 I do not see how she can visit the area and remain totally
silent on what we plan to contribute to economic relief efforts. If it is
not possible for Mrs. Mondale to announce that the administration is
prepared to support a specific appropriation, then the next best course
would be a statement that the administration accepts the principle
of long-term reconstruction assistance to Yugoslavia but is currently
evaluating the appropriate level (this, of course, commits us to some-
thing, and to working with the Yugoslavs in deciding how much that
something is). Should even that be impossible, then I strongly urge
that the Yugoslavs be told we can do nothing before Mrs. Mondale
arrives, to wait until after her departure would be insulting to the
Yugoslavs and unfair to Mrs. Mondale.
7. So, in my view, we can avoid a decision for only a little while
longer. And as the decision is thought about I hope two factors will
be kept in mind.
A) If the USG decides it cannot assist it should be remembered
that the Yugoslavs will—since they know about the Kennedy Amend-
ment—view it a negative administration decision in the face of congres-
sional willingness to help.
B) When Tito dies, and for some time thereafter, we will surely be
searching for ways to show our support for those Yugoslavs who want
tostandagainst: 1)Sovietpressures;2)thosewhowouldreturn thecoun-
try to a more repressive and centralized internal system acceptable to
art exhibit in Belgrade and a tour of the areas affected by the earthquake in Montenegro.
In telegram 152031 to Belgrade, June 13, the Department provided talking points for
Mrs. Mondale on U.S. policy toward reconstruction aid. Mrs. Mondale was to stress that
the administration was working actively with Congress to find a way to participate in
the reconstruction efforts in Montenegro, on the basis of the “broad base of friendship
between the Yugoslav and American peoples.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central
Foreign Policy File, D790266–1018)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
the East; 3) nationalist forces ready to tear the country apart. And when
that time comes we will, I predict, regret any earlier lost opportunities—
such as the one now before us—to demonstrate that we can be counted
upon.6
Eagleburger
6 On June 4, Aaron wrote on Rentschler’s covering memorandum forwarding the
telegram to him and Brzezinski (see footnote 1 above), that “Christopher will try to get
the dough from the cots and blankets fund. SSA, AID, and supplementals are out.”
Brzezinski asked if a memorandum from him to Vance would be necessary. Aaron’s
providing $10 million for economic assistance. The justification for the decision noted
that the assistance “would help the Yugoslavs overcome the economic difficulties caused
by the earthquake.” The justification also noted that “in so doing, it would support
Yugoslavia’s continued political independence. Of equal importance, such assistance
would demonstrate that the United States can be relied upon in time of need.” (Carter
Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Country
266.
Memorandum From Robert Kimmitt, Marshall Brement, and
Steve Larrabee of the National Security Council Staff to the
President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs
(Brzezinski)1
Washington, July 11, 1979
SUBJECT
VBB: Arms Sales to Yugoslavia (S)
We recommended that this issue be discussed at the luncheon
because of our belief that our emerging military supply relationship
with Yugoslavia is at a critical juncture, and because State and Defense
appear to be handling this issue in much too routine a fashion. Our
hope is that your raising the issue will be a signal to Vance and Brown
David Aaron wrote at the top of the memorandum: “Not such a big deal.”

Yugoslavia
that careful attention should be paid to decisions that they will face
shortly.2 (S)
The basic policy guidance on this issue is that we wish to enhance
our military supply relationship with Yugoslavia, with emphasis on
the political impact. Since that policy was articulated in 1977, wide-
ranging discussions have been held with the Yugoslavians. The results
of those discussions—proposed arms sales—are now upon us. The two
most pressing sales are (1) DRAGON shoulder-fired anti-tank missiles
and (2) MAVERICK air-to-ground missiles. (S)
DRAGON: We have agreed to provide 1000 of these missiles, and
discussions are continuing concerning cost, test sets, and other technical
details. Apparently, however, the 1000 missiles earmarked for Yugo-
slavia have recently been discovered to be defective, and the Army is
looking at whether it would be willing to provide 1000 functional
missiles from its already depleted stocks. The Army may say no to this
idea, but Harold3 can overrule them. We believe that not providing
the Yugoslavians with 1000 functional missiles could do irreparable
damage to our emerging relationship, and we recommend that you ask
Harold to look into this issue, with an eye toward nipping in the bud
any suggestion that we transfer the defective missiles instead.4 (S)
MAVERICK: The interagency consideration of this sale is nearing
completion, and State is preparing to go to Congress for appropriate
consultations. While we believe that such consultations are necessary
because of congressional interest in both Yugoslavia and MAVERICKs,
we strongly believe that only Church and Zablocki should be contacted
because the potential for a leak would be exacerbated by wider discus-
sions (a proposed sale of TOW anti-tank missiles fell through recently
because of premature disclosure of the sale).5 We recommend that you
ask Vance to limit the congressional consultations. (S)
2 The issue was discussed at the VBB lunch on July 12. In a memorandum later
that day, Robert Gates informed Larrabee, Brement, and Kimmitt that Brzezinski tasked
Larrabee to clarify what decisions were needed by the principals. (Carter Library,
National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Country Chron
3 Secretary of Defense Harold Brown.
4 In a July 13 memorandum to Brzezinski, Larrabee recommended that Brown
ensure that the 1,000 Dragon missiles committed to Yugoslavia “should be functional,
not defective, even if this means taking them out of the Army inventory.” (Carter Library,
National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Europe, USSR, and East/West, Larrabee Subject
5 In his July 13 memorandum to Brzezinski, Larrabee noted that “Vance should be
aware that Lucy Benson is prepared to go ahead with the sale of Mavericks.” Larrabee
also recommended that “Vance should formally inform the President” and that “we
should limit consultations with Congress as much as possible in order to prevent leaks
which could seriously damage relations with Yugoslavia.” Brzezinski asked for draft
memoranda to Brown and Vance with White House guidance. (Ibid.)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
Also, although our State and Defense counterparts do not all agree
with us on this point, we believe that the President should be apprised
of the fact that his policy guidance has resulted in a program that is
at a significant stage of development. You might want to discuss with
Vance and Brown how the President might be informed.6 (C)
6 Carter was informed of the decision in an Evening Report from Vance. In a
July 18 memorandum from Larrabee and Kimmitt to Brzezinski recommending that no
guidance for Brown and Vance was necessary, Robert Hunter commented that the
President “Noted OK in the margin” of the Evening Report. (Ibid.)
267.
Telegram From the Embassy in Yugoslavia to the
Department of State1
6799. Military handle as Specat Exclusive. State for Under Secretary
Newsom. ASD/ISA for Asst Secretary McGiffert. Subject: (S) The US-
1. S-entire text
2. I have, since returning from the US last month, reviewed the
progress (or better, the lack thereof) in the US-Yugoslav military rela-
tionship. It is not a pretty picture, as the case studies detailed later in
this cable will show. In fact, we have done so badly that I have come
to doubt that the USG is capable of managing the program we set for
ourselves several years ago; instead, I fear that we are on the way to
convincing the Yugoslav military either that we were never serious or
that we are incompetent. In either case, we risk damage not only to
Secret; Priority; Exdis, Noforn. Also sent Priority to DODASD/ISA. Sent for information
to CNO, CDA, CSAF, USCINCEUR, CDRUSASAC, CJCS, and USNMRSHAPE.
instances in which the costs of military equipment quoted to Yugoslav officials ended
up being significantly higher. Eagleburger wrote that “the evolving US-Yugoslav military
relationships are not at a point where ‘mini-shocks’” like the ones described in the
telegram “can be absorbed with no set-backs.” “The Yugoslavs have a healthy case of
paranoia” he continued, and “I fail to see why we have to try to prove to them that we
are both malicious and incompetent.” Continuation of the FMS programs with Yugo-
slavia, the Ambassador concluded, would hinge on minimizing any more mistakes.

Yugoslavia
our effort to develop a relationship with the Yugoslav military but to
our broader bilateral interests as well. Either we take steps now to get
our act together or we should withdraw from the effort before further
damage is done.
3. What has upset me most is our consistent failure to handle
the potential Dragon purchase with even a modicum of competence.
Paragraph 9, et. seq., details this sad story. Suffice it to say here that
we have quoted wildly different prices to the Yugoslavs at least twice,
offered Dragons that we then found were faulty, emphasized that we
needed a GOY decision soon so that we would not have to reopen the
production line (and thereby charge a substantially higher price), and
then told them we would have to restart production (at a substantially
higher price). The tragedy is that the Dragon buy was the first major
opportunity for us to put our money where our mouth was and so far
we have messed it up to a fare-thee-well.
4. The Dragon case is not the only mess we have made of things.
In addition we have now lost, after more than two years of screwing
rounds. And—at least so it appears from here—we and the Yugoslavs
seem to be well on the way to substantial misunderstanding about an
air defense radar system that has been under discussion for some
months. Just who—we or the Yugoslavs—has been most responsible
for the confusion is not clear.
5. I do not contend that we know all the facts on any of these cases.
There may well be extenuating circumstances that will explain why
we have performed so miserably. But that is really beside the point:
What is important to the GOY is that we are unable or unprepared to
respond to Yugoslav requests in a timely and effective manner. We
are flunking the reliability test, and for the Yugoslavs—in terms of
their concerns about the future—a passing grade is a sine qua non.
6. Nor will I argue that the Yugoslavs have been without blame
for the sad state in which we now find ourselves. They too have been
less than efficient, as the air defense radar system case shows but it
takes substantial ingenuity for a nation of 220 million people that prides
itself on its tradition of efficiency to match the ineptitude of a Balkan
nation of 22 million. We, alas, have succeeded.
7. The next meeting of the joint military working group is now
tentatively scheduled for mid-October in Washington. So it is time to
face up to some hard choices. Unless I can be assured that steps have
been taken to get a firm grip on the management of our military
program with Yugoslavia it is time to call off the noble but so far
unsuccessful experiment. Either we tell the Yugoslavs at the October
meeting that we are distressed at the way things have been going, that
we know much of the fault lies on our side, that we will not permit

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
things to continue as they are, and that steps have been taken at an
appropriately high level in Washington to ensure that we do in fact
do better, or we tell them frankly that we are simply not equipped to
handle the kind of sales program they want, that they would do better
to look to our NATO Allies for the equipment they seek, and that we
will do what we can to encourage our Allies to respond positively.3
8. The following are summaries of the histories of several of our
less than successful sales efforts, they are based on the facts as we
know them here, and thus may be less than complete. I hope that
Washington will not waste time drawing up defensive briefs on each,
as has sometimes been the case when we earlier leveled complaints.
The time is past when such efforts are of any use.
[Omitted here is the summary of the negotiation of the sale of the
Dragon Missile System to Yugoslavia up to September 1979.]
Scanlan
3 In her September 19 reply, Benson informed Eagleburger that she was convening
an interagency meeting to review the status of the Yugoslav program and would draw
up an action program and time table for the ongoing programs. Benson also requested
suggestions for the agenda by September 21 as well as Eagleburger’s further views on
Eagleburger wrote that “our major problem is management” and that “the services, in
particular the Army, need to put someone at the helm who has not only the responsibility,
but also the authority to oversee and manage security assistance for Yugoslavia.”

Yugoslavia
268.
Memorandum From Stephen Larrabee of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) and the President’s
Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Aaron)1
Washington, September 18, 1979
SUBJECT
Military Sales to Yugoslavia (U)
Attached is a blistering cable from Larry Eagleburger, our Ambas-
sador in Belgrade, regarding our inept handling of our Yugoslav mili-
tary relationship and its serious political implications.2 I feel it deserves
your attention. Even allowing for Eagleburger’s non-diplomatic style,
the message is unmistakably clear and well-documented: we have
seriously mismanaged military sales to Yugoslavia to the point where
we risk damage not only to the ties to the Yugoslav military, which
we have so carefully sought to nurture over the past two years, but to
our broader bilateral interests as well. Indeed, Eagleburger feels that
the point has been reached where we have to get our act together or
withdraw from the relationship entirely. (C)
While slightly, but only slightly, overdramatized, Eagleburger’s
analysis is basically valid. Much of the problem lies in cost overruns,
some of which could (and should) have been avoided, others of which
could not have been. Be that as it may, the fundamental point is that
we have given the appearance of incompetence and ineptitude, which
has seriously undermined Yugoslav confidence in our ability to re-
spond to their needs in a timely and effective manner. As Eagleburger
rightly points out, this is bound to have important consequences not
only for our carefully nurtured attempts to develop a relationship with
the Yugoslav military, but for our broader political relationship as
The next meeting of the joint military working group is in mid-
October. This is an important—perhaps the last—chance to show the
Yugoslavs that we are serious about our commitments, and we simply
have got to get our act together. I have talked to George Vest about
this. He feels we should give Jim Siena at ISA a chance to get DOD
into shape (Siena is away and returns tomorrow). However, time is
running out, and DOD is so hopelessly mired down in bureaucratic
tial. Sent for action. Copies were sent to Kimmitt and Brement.
2 See Document 267.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
red tape and inter-service rivalry that I despair that the issue can
successfully be resolved in time for the joint military meeting in October
without a push from you or Brown. (C)
I suggest that the topic be raised at the VBB luncheon, either this
week or, at the latest, next week. Given the time constraints, this week
would be better but if, after reading Eagleburger’s cable, you feel (as
Vest does) that we should give Siena more time to get DOD’s act
together, Kimmitt and I will postpone preparations of material until
next week. But the issue does need urgent top-level attention and your active
intervention. Otherwise we risk jeopardizing much of the careful work
we have done to develop the military relationship—and conceivably
a lot more. (C)
RECOMMENDATION:
That you raise the issue at the VBB luncheon.3 (U)
APPROVE
DISAPPROVE
THIS WEEK
NEXT WEEK
3 Gates wrote in the margin: “Sounds like a suitable agenda item.”
4 Brzezinski approved the recommendation and wrote at the bottom of the memo-
randum: “Tell me concretely what needs to be done. I need a good-tough memo, with
quotes from Eagleburger, to both V[ance]-B[rown]—and a DR. ZB.” In a September 19
memorandum, Kimmitt and Larrabee recommended that Brzezinski raise the issue of
military sales to Yugoslavia at the next VBB lunch, and stress that “both Departments
need to give higher-level attention to issues that arise and decisions that are made.” On
the sale of Dragon missiles to Yugoslavia, Kimmitt and Larrabee, suggested that Brzezin-
ski ask Brown “personally to look into the current status of this case in an effort to
rescue it.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Europe, USSR, and
20, Gates notified Larrabee and Kimmitt that at the VBB “it was decided that Brown
would expedite resolution of the problem and would report as soon as possible.” (Ibid.)

Yugoslavia
269.
National Intelligence Estimate1
Washington, September 25, 1979
PROSPECTS FOR POST-TITO YUGOSLAVIA
I. INTRODUCTION
1. The early 1980s will probably be a time of troubles in Yugoslavia.
The precipitant will be the incapacitation or death of President Josip
Broz Tito, whose role in the creation and preservation of contemporary
Yugoslavia has been so large that one cannot be confident it will prove
dispensable.
2. On balance, our confidence on this score is lower now than it
was at the time of our last estimate in 1973. During the past several
years, and especially since the June 1978 Yugoslav Party Congress, a
number of developments which had seemed conducive to a relatively
smooth and orderly post-Tito succession have lost momentum. Simul-
taneously, a number of countervailing developments have ensued. In
particular, the institutionalization of an effective central policymaking
process has virtually stopped, while economic “stagflation” has per-
sisted, and Yugoslav-Soviet relations have further deteriorated.
3. We remain fairly confident that Tito’s passing, in and of itself,
will not during the first six months or so pose a threat to the integrity
or independence of the Yugoslav state. It will, however, reduce the
regime’s ability to manage domestic and foreign challenges, which are
likely to be more severe in the post-Tito period than they have been
in the 1970s. Moreover, the high degree of internal political solidarity
that will probably characterize the immediate post-Tito succession is
unlikely to persist. In consequence, the country will enter a period,
probably prolonged, of great uncertainty and potential instability.
4. The range of plausible contingencies that will shape and reshape
the sequence of events is very large and includes the distinct possibility
that Yugoslavia will not weather the 1980s with its integrity and inde-
pendence intact. Of crucial importance is the interplay among a number
of central variables, of which the most critical will be the nature of
Soviet initiatives and reactions, the efficacy of Western assistance, and,
not declassified]. Carter wrote on the cover: “The main unanswered question is: through
what means the Soviets can present such a threat to Yugoslavia. J.” Attached but not
printed is volume II, “The Annexes,” which discuss specific Yugoslav political, economic,
and military aspects. The text is available in Yugoslavia: From “National Communism” to
National Collapse, p. 579 and following.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
above all, the cohesion and adaptability of Tito’s successors. While
these variables are potentially too volatile to permit any confident
judgment about Yugoslavia’s future in the 1980s, the odds are at least
marginally in favor of Yugoslavia’s continuing as an integral independ-
ent state. Internal instability and vulnerability to external pressures
during a prolonged transition period, however, could make even an
integral Yugoslavia a recurring source of international tension.
II. SUCCESSION CONTEXTS
A. Tito’s Historical Achievements
5. At the age of 87, President Tito remains the unchallenged leader
of a regime that he founded over 30 years ago. Under his leadership,
Yugoslavia has not only survived severe domestic and foreign chal-
lenges but has undergone remarkable transformations.
6. Economically, Yugoslavia has changed from a command to a
market-socialist system, while rapidly industrializing and steadily
upgrading the standard of living of its people. Since 1948, industry’s
share in the gross national product has risen from 16 to 42 percent,
while real per capita annual income has climbed from $650 to slightly
over $2,500, and automobiles, refrigerators, washing machines, and
other consumer durables are no longer scarce luxury items.
7. Politically, Yugoslavia has moved from a highly centralized and
repressive Soviet-style dictatorship to a relatively open system with a
considerable amount of authentic individual participation in local
affairs. Although the League of Communists is still the country’s only
political party, other public organizations are no longer subject to strict
party control, and there have been experimental multicandidate elec-
tions for local public offices. Similarly, while public political dissent is
still severely punished, literary publications are no longer subjected to
precensorship, and rank-and-file citizens are free to travel and live
abroad.
8. Militarily, the guerrilla partisans of wartime Yugoslavia have
been transformed into conventional armed forces, backed by a territo-
rial reserve defense force, designed to conduct prolonged unconven-
tional warfare. The regime has simultaneously fostered development
of the Army as a guarantor of national unity and as an integrative
institution in the country’s domestic political life.
9. On the international plane, Yugoslavia has moved from near
isolation to intense multilateral involvement and far-reaching ideologi-
cal influence, and has achieved political prestige disproportionate to its
size. Its status has changed from heretical outcast to that of a recognized
variant within the Communist world. In the West, it has gradually
won acceptance not only as a courageous breakaway Soviet satellite

Yugoslavia
but as an active interlocutor in East-West and North-South exchanges.
And in the Third World it has established itself not only as a symbolic
European ally but as a leading force within the nonaligned movement.
B. Institutional and Procedural Flaws in Tito’s Legacy
10. These are all transformations for which Tito can claim substan-
tial personal credit. They are also transformations in which large num-
bers of Yugoslavs take understandable pride. In consequence, Tito can
be reasonably confident that his successors will not follow Soviet and
Chinese precedents and launch a process of “de-Titoization.” On the
contrary, he can probably rely on his successors both to profess and
to feel a strong loyalty to most of the basic tenets of Titoism. However,
he has recently introduced new decision-making procedures that will
make it extremely difficult for this loyalty to find expression in effective
leadership.
11. In particular, the emergence of such leadership will be strongly
impeded by the strictly collegial policymaking procedures that Tito
has prescribed both for the nine-man collective State Presidency and—
since 1978—for the much more important 24-man Presidium of the
League of Communists.2 So long as Tito is alive and well, these proce-
dures do not have decisive significance. Once Tito leaves the scene,
however, his successors will be left to try to make timely and coherent
decisions in large collegiums with short-term rotating chairmen and
rules of conduct that require so much consultation and coordination
that they almost entail a paralyzing liberum veto. Such an enterprise
would be highly problematical under the best of circumstances—let
alone the trying circumstances that will confront Tito’s successors.
C. Economic Strains
12. Weakened central leadership will make it more difficult for the
post-Tito regime to manage what are in any case likely to be increased
economic problems. At a minimum, their lack of charismatic authority
will deprive Tito’s successors of an asset that has helped to prevent
economic crisis during the 1970s, when the effects of high inflation
(averaging 17 percent per annum), large deficits in the balance of pay-
ments, growing regional economic disparities, and fluctuations in
growth of consumption, associated with wide swings in overall growth
rates, have threatened to get out of hand. Moreover, the regional pres-
sures behind inflation and external deficits will be intensified by a new
2 For a detailed discussion of party institutional trends and evolving policymaking
arrangements and their likely effect on the succession, see volume II, annex A, “The
League of Communists.” [Footnote is in the original.]

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
decentralization program that is giving the regions a greater say in
national economic decisions.
13. During the 1980s, Yugoslavia is likely to face persistent foreign
trade deficits as well as continued high domestic inflation and unem-
ployment. Western demand for Yugoslav exports will probably remain
slack, while competition in Western hard-currency markets will
increase. Domestic energy supplies will tighten, and jumps in world
oil prices (Yugoslavia currently imports 36 percent of its energy and
75 percent of its oil) will boost external deficits and domestic prices
sharply.
14. Such strains will increase Yugoslav reliance on Western financ-
ing. Belgrade can probably continue to count on substantial support
from official Western lenders. At present, however, over half of the
$10 billion Yugoslav debt is held by private Western banks. Their
loans have periodically fallen short of Yugoslav needs and could be
considerably affected by heightened political uncertainty in a time
without Tito. If private foreign lending should be curtailed for a lengthy
period and the difference is not covered from official Western sources,
post-Tito Yugoslavia could not avoid a significant economic slowdown.
This, in turn, would aggravate the endemic cyclical pattern of growth
and seriously increase the level of unemployment, which currently
amounts to almost 7 percent of the national work force and about 20
percent of the urban work force in some of the country’s less developed
regions. If the leadership proves incapable of designing and enforcing
an austerity program appropriate to such circumstances, there could
be a prolonged economic crisis with potentially disruptive political
ramifications.3
D. Regional and Communal Tensions
15. Economic stringencies seem certain to lead to sharper conflicts
of interest among Yugoslavia’s constituent republics and provinces.4
Such conflicts, in turn, could escalate into militant confrontations
among the already antagonistic ethnonational communities whose
“homelands” are competing for scarce material and financial resources.
Such confrontations have been a recurrent feature of postwar Yugoslav
history and have periodically forced even Tito onto the defensive. In
1968, for example, there were large riots by the country’s Albanians,
who contended that their “homeland,” the province of Kosovo, was
3 For a more detailed assessment of Yugoslavia’s economic prospects and the eco-
nomic issues that will confront Tito’s successors, see volume II, annex B, “The Economy.”
[Footnote is in the original.]
4 For an analysis of the role of ethnic divisions in Yugoslav politics, see volume II,
annex C, “Nationalism and Regionalism.” [Footnote is in the original.]

Yugoslavia
an economic and political colony of the Serbs. And, from 1968 to 1972,
Serbs and Croats engaged in a prolonged confrontation, during which
tens of thousands of citizens joined outspokenly nationalist organiza-
tions and participated in nationalist demonstrations, and almost the
entire Croatian party leadership evinced “national Communist” pro-
clivities.
16. Despite the relative tranquillity that has reigned on nationality
issues since the so-called Croatian crisis, the perceptions and passions
that fueled these nationalist outbursts have not disappeared. Because
of their self-replenishing and mutually reinforcing religious, cultural,
and linguistic roots, these perceptions and passions could easily be
reactivated not only by impending economic stringencies but by a host
of other stimuli. With Tito’s departure, moreover, the regime will lose
most of the protection that it has enjoyed as a result of his unimpeach-
able reputation as an ethnic nonpartisan. None of his likely successors
have even a remotely comparable reputation. And some have such
close and exclusive ties with “their own” particular republics that
almost any policy that they initiate or support is likely to be challenged
as ethnocentric.
E. Soviet Pressures
17. The Kremlin will not necessarily attempt to prevent a smooth
and orderly Yugoslav succession. Under certain circumstances Moscow
would see advantages in a stable, viable Yugoslavia. In any case, the
USSR is likely to adopt a restrained policy in the immediate post-
Tito period. Although it probably retains a desire to reincorporate
Yugoslavia into its East European empire, Moscow could adopt a
hands-off or even supportive policy in the immediate post-Tito period.
Such a policy could persist for some time should Belgrade become
more responsive to Soviet policies and more distant from the West.
While not impossible, however, such a long-term change in Yugoslav
policy is unlikely.
18. Even if developments in Yugoslavia prove less favorable to
Soviet interests, Moscow is unlikely to subject Yugoslavia to a direct
military intervention. A Soviet resort to force will remain improbable
so long as it continues to entail serious risks of a sustained Yugoslav
resistance and possible Western political and military support. How-
ever, a very sharp escalation of centrifugal tendencies within Yugo-
slavia might be seen by the Soviets as significantly reducing those risks,
particularly if it were perceived as both fragmenting the Yugoslav will
to resist and discouraging Western readiness to respond.
19. If the temptations created by such a perception of Yugoslav
and Western weakness were combined with sufficient danger of a
radical growth of Western influence in parts of a disintegrating Yugo-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
slavia, the otherwise strong Soviet inhibitions against military interven-
tion in Yugoslavia might be overcome. In such a case, the Soviets would
be enticed by the chance to reestablish their direct presence on the
Adriatic and to demonstrate a dramatic pro-Soviet shift in the regional
and international correlation of forces.
20. But even if such a combination of circumstances does not arise,
and Tito’s successors do not have to contend with a serious threat of
Soviet military intervention, they are likely to be subjected to increased
Soviet pressure. As in the past, the Kremlin will attempt to secure
freer Soviet access to Yugoslav naval facilities and regularized Soviet
overflight rights. Along with these military objectives, it will also press
for reduced Yugoslav support for Romanian and other efforts to estab-
lish national autonomy within the Soviet bloc, less active Yugoslav
encouragement of Eurocommunism, diminished Yugoslav criticism of
Soviet foreign policy, and less vigorous Yugoslav pursuit of a China
connection.
21. In pursuing these goals, the Soviets may initially place heavier
reliance on incentives than on pressures or sanctions. Furthermore, in
contemplating sanctions, the Kremlin will doubtless take account of
the possibility that “overkill” could prove counterproductive and drive
Yugoslavia toward the West. In the face of prolonged Tito-like resist-
ance, however, the Kremlin will probably exert stronger pressure on
Tito’s successors than it dared to exert on Tito, with his long record
of defiance and demonstrated ability to rally domestic and foreign
support. Thus, it will be less hesitant to protest strongly and, if neces-
sary, to follow its protests with measured “retaliation” in the form of
stronger Bulgarian demarches on the Macedonian question, larger and
more frequent Warsaw Pact maneuvers on Yugoslavia’s frontiers, and
more active and supportive contacts with antiregime nationalist and
pro-Soviet “Cominformist” groups both within and outside Yugoslavia.
22. Such pressures or sanctions would be even more likely if Tito’s
successors were to display what the Kremlin viewed as excessively
Westernizing tendencies—for example, by obstructing major Soviet
diplomatic initiatives, by tolerating the public expression of anti-Soviet
views, or by sanctioning political pluralism within Yugoslavia. In fact,
if it were reasonably confident that the West was unwilling or unable
to compensate, the Kremlin would probably be prepared to retaliate
against such tendencies by withholding or curtailing scheduled deliver-
ies of arms, petroleum, and other items of which the Soviet Union is
a major Yugoslav supplier.
III. SUCCESSION PROSPECTS
23. To cope with the combined effects of increased economic strin-
gencies, heightened ethnonational tensions, and intensified Soviet pres-

Yugoslavia
sures, Tito’s successors will have to overcome the constraints on effec-
tive and timely decisionmaking that inhere in a strictly collegial
leadership system. Initially, they will probably not encounter inordi-
nate difficulties. The great bulk of the population will react to Tito’s
departure by rallying around the regime, and the ruling elite will
display a high degree of collective solidarity. Before long, however,
these shock effects can be expected to dissipate. Public support for the
regime will then become much more contingent on policy outputs and
outcomes, and Tito’s successors will find it much harder to submerge
their internal differences. Although the preceding period will not neces-
sarily be free of significant challenges, this will be the point at which
the transition to the post-Tito era really begins and Tito’s achievements
undergo their first really strenuous posthumous test of endurance.
A. Breakdown Possibilities
24. The chances of passing this test have been diminished by the
recent (February 1979) death of Edvard Kardelj, who was the one Tito
aide who enjoyed broad popular respect and the general trust and
deference of his colleagues. Without such a man to serve as arbiter
and peacemaker, Tito’s successors will find it extremely difficult to
compromise their policy differences and rise above their personal and
factional antagonisms and animosities. In consequence, it is easy to
envision a post-Tito recurrence of the political degeneration which took
place during the late 1960s and early 1970s, when Tito allowed his
then lieutenants a fairly free hand in domestic policy.
25. By the time Tito belatedly terminated this experiment in late
1971, virtually the entire domestic policy process had succumbed to
paralysis, and personal and factional relations within the ruling elite
had deteriorated to the point where Yugoslavia faced incipient violence.
To restore political efficacy and order, moreover, Tito had to draw on
every ounce of his immense personal authority. And, when it appeared
that even this would not suffice, he took the extreme step of threatening
to call in the military.
26. In the event of a similar impasse among Tito’s heirs, the military
might well intervene on its own initiative if it were not invited to do
so by elements within the leadership. Tito’s designation of the armed
forces as the ultimate guarantor of Yugoslav unity could be cited as
justification of such an intervention and could mitigate reluctance in
the officer corps to interfere in political matters.
27. With their considerable internal discipline and cohesion
and close connection with the country’s security forces, the armed
forces could probably impose a degree of stability in an otherwise
shaky situation. In the process, they would probably tend to favor a
greater reliance on administrative and centralist methods of control

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
and a substantial increase in the discretionary authority of party
professionals.
28. However, the Yugoslav military is not politically monolithic,
and a political demarche or coup would almost certainly deepen its
internal divisions. Furthermore, any expansion in the military’s politi-
cal role would undoubtedly alienate Croats, Slovenes, Albanians, and
other non-Serbs. Although the regime has made substantial efforts to
dilute the historic Serbian dominance of the officer corps, non-Serbs
still view the military as a predominantly Serbian institution with a
centralist bias that threatens their national interests and identities.5
29. Accordingly, while a military intervention might temporarily
stabilize a crisis situation, the longer term prospect would remain
one of potential instability and unrest, with an appreciable chance of
ultimate civil war.
B. More Stable Alternatives
30. This readily apparent prospect of such a disastrous outcome
provides the best hope that Tito’s successors will do everything possible
to avert it. This hope is strengthened by the fact that all of Tito’s present
top lieutenants played important supportive roles in the eventual reso-
lution of the leadership deadlock of 1968–72. Furthermore, some of the
personal and factional antagonisms that have arisen within the present
party Presidium are likely to be muted by future changes in member-
ship, including a number of changes that are scheduled for the immedi-
ate future and others that could well occur before Tito’s departure. In
consequence, it is possible that the post-Tito Presidium will adopt less
strictly collegial decisionmaking procedures and that a majority of its
members can be organized into a more or less stable ruling coalition.
31. In broad terms, two such coalitions, with potentially overlap-
ping memberships, seem feasible in the light of current and emergent
Yugoslav political realities. One, more likely in the event of an early
succession, might be headed by old Titoists such as Vladimir Bakaric,
Milos Minic, and Nikola Ljubicic, and would be characterized by a
strong commitment to the perpetuation of the status quo ante. It would
do everything possible to preserve the present distribution of authority
between the center and the republics, to maintain a “self-managing”
socialist-market economy, to foster the growth of independent Commu-
nist and nonaligned forces in world affairs, and to guard against too
Westward a tilt in Yugoslav domestic and foreign policy. The other
grouping, more likely in the event of a delayed succession, would
5 For a discussion of the Yugoslav military establishment and ethnic attitudes toward
its role, see volume II, annex D, “The Yugoslav Military.” [Footnote is in the original.]

Yugoslavia
include more recently appointed members of the present Presidium
(such as Stane Dolanc) as well as top republic party bureaucrats from
whose ranks replacements for incumbent old Titoists are likely to be
drawn.
32. Although Titoist in crucial respects, a coalition of the latter sort
would be far less status quo oriented than its “old Titoist” counterpart
and might be ready to introduce a significant amount of incremental
change. With respect to the division of authority between the center
and the republics, for example, it might be not only willing but eager
to sponsor a return to the more decentralized pattern that obtained
during the late 1960s, especially in matters of day-to-day administration
and management. At the same time, in intrarepublic matters it might
be ready to sacrifice significant features of workers’ self-management
and self-government in the interest of managerial efficiency and politi-
cal discipline.
33. Along with these changes in domestic policies, a coalition in
which old Titoists played a less dominant role might be prepared to
curtail Yugoslavia’s role in an increasingly fragmented nonaligned
movement. In addition, such a coalition might be less congenitally
suspicious of Soviet intentions than a coalition dominated by men
with more vivid personal memories of the original Tito-Stalin split.
Nonetheless, mistrust of the Soviet Union will remain endemic and a
significant Eastward tilt in Yugoslav policy is unlikely unless Soviet
pressures on Belgrade fail to elicit effective Western support. In fact,
such a coalition might eventually be more willing than its old Titoist
counterpart to permit a gradual Westward tilt in Yugoslav policy in
return for economic benefits and credible security reassurances.
34. Even the transformations of one of these potential coalitions
into a more or less stable ruling group would not guarantee the sort
of post-Tito leadership that might be needed to deal with a severe
crisis. However, it would ensure at least a measure of leadership and
would provide some safeguards against the kinds of erratic or diluted
policy choices that could inadvertently invite foreign encroachments
and wholesale withdrawals of domestic support. And it would make it
possible and worthwhile for interested foreign governments to support
Tito’s successors in their efforts to preserve Yugoslavia’s integrity and
independence.
IV. IMPLICATIONS FOR THE WEST
35. The amounts and kinds of support that Tito’s successors request
from the West will vary with time and circumstances. Except under
great duress, even a Westward-inclined post-Tito leadership is unlikely
to request explicitly or to welcome conspicuous “pro-Yugoslav”
changes in Western security policy. During the immediate transition,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
the chief international concern of Tito’s successors will be to deprive
Moscow of any plausible excuse to intervene in Yugoslav affairs. In
consequence, they will probably desire and expect nothing more than
a prompt declaration of continued US and West European interest in
the preservation of Yugoslavia’s independence and integrity, coupled
with every possible effort to prevent an escalation of hostile emigre
activities. Although there is little reason to suppose that emigre activi-
ties alone pose a real threat to the regime, Tito’s successors view them
as such and will certainly exaggerate their potential impact and treat
Western behavior toward them as a test of Western intentions.
36. If they are faced with escalating Soviet pressure, Tito’s succes-
sors could request and/or welcome Western representations to Mos-
cow on their behalf. Within relatively short order, moreover, they are
likely to seek active help in preserving and extending their financial
relations with the West, including not only bilateral relations but
relations with the Common Market. In addition, they could turn to the
West for larger supplies of arms, especially in areas of high technology.
And, under extreme Soviet pressure, they could appeal to the United
States and NATO to exert economic and political pressure on Moscow,
to bolster and alert the 6th Fleet and other forces on NATO’s southern
flank, and, if need be, to provide direct military support.6
37. No amount or kind of Western support can stop Tito’s succes-
sors from engaging in a self-destructive succession struggle or prevent
Yugoslavia’s constituent nationalities from embarking on a civil war,
if they are determined to do so. However, skillfully timed and carefully
designed and orchestrated Western support could make a very large
difference to the consolidation and survival of a potentially viable post-
Tito leadership and thereby to the preservation of a stable regional,
continental, and global balance of power.
6 For a more extensive discussion of Tito’s foreign policy legacy and the ways in
which post-Tito policies toward East and West may interact, see volume II, annex E,
“Foreign Policy.” [Footnote is in the original.]

Yugoslavia
270.
Memorandum of Conversation1
SUBJECT
Summary of David Aaron’s Meeting with Colonel General Vujatovic
PARTICIPANTS
Colonel General Laze Vujatovic, Yugoslav Assistant Federal Secretary of
National Defense for Military Economy
Vladimir Sindjelic, Minister-Counselor Embassy of the Socialist Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia
David Aaron, Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
Steve Larrabee, NSC Staff Member
James Siena, Deputy Assistant Secretary (European & NATO Affairs) (ISA)
After welcoming General Vujatovic, Mr. Aaron noted that the only
thing he had not been dealing with lately was military sales to Yugo-
slavia. However, he promised to pay close attention to this in the
General Vujatovic stated that he was here to sign the Memorandum
of Understanding to improve cooperation.2 (S)
Mr. Aaron underscored the importance that the Administration
attached to the signing of the Memorandum and to the institutionalized
arrangements created by it.3 (S)
Noting that there had been many attempts to improve cooperation
between Yugoslavia and the United States lately, General Vujatovic
remarked that the Yugoslavs were interested in strengthening coopera-
tion in the military field in order to maintain their independence. In
regard to military sales however, the two sides had not been able to
Wing of the White House.
2 In an October 3 memorandum, Larrabee recommended to Brzezinski that either
he or Aaron meet Vujatovic for 15–20 minutes while the latter was in Washington to
sign the Memorandum of Understanding on Bilateral Military Cooperation which had
been negotiated the previous December. Brzezinski approved a meeting with Aaron.
(Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File,
3 On October 12, Larrabee forwarded to Aaron the Department of State briefing
paper for his meeting with Vujatovic. In his covering memorandum, Larrabee recom-
mended that Aaron stress three basic points with the Yugoslav General: Emphasize the
importance of the MOU; reassure the GOY of the administration’s intention to pursue
development of closer U.S.-Yugoslav military cooperation; and stress that the Depart-
ments of State and Defense have taken steps to improve communication with Yugoslav
authorities. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Europe, USSR, and

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
achieve full understanding so far.4 The Yugoslavs were interested in
obtaining up-to-date equipment because at some point in the future
they might have to face a better equipped adversary. (S)
Mr. Aaron stressed the great importance that the US attached to
Yugoslav independence and integrity. This was the basis of the US
interest in pursuing a military supply relationship with Yugoslavia; it
would allow Yugoslavia to strengthen its independence. While there
had been some difficulties, the US, for its part, was determined to
overcome them. We wanted to put the problems behind us and use
the institutional mechanisms created by the Memorandum of Under-
standing to lay the basis for improved cooperation in the military
General Vujatovic agreed. In his view the US and Yugoslavia should
attempt to put aside past problems and concentrate on the cooperative
aspects of the relationship. (C)
Mr. Aaron said that when he was in Yugoslavia with the Vice
President he had not had enough time to see very much. The next
time he visited Yugoslavia he hoped to see more, particularly defense
installations. (C)
General Vujatovic replied that Mr. Aaron would be welcome in
Yugoslavia and that he would try to arrange to show him whatever
he would like to see. (S)
Mr. Aaron said that he would particularly like to see units with
new American equipment. (S)
General Vujatovic noted that at present Yugoslavia did not have
such units. (U)
Mr. Aaron remarked that he would have to talk to Mr. Siena about
General Vujatovic said that the Yugoslavs had included visits to
defense installations when General Rogers was in Yugoslavia. General
Rogers had seemed quite pleased with his visit. Continuing, General
Yugoslav Government had decided to purchase 1,000 Dragon anti-tank missiles to be
delivered by the end of 1979. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
D790438–1013) A week later, however, Vujatovic informed the Embassy that the Yugoslav
Government had changed its mind and would not be purchasing any Dragon missiles
Vujatovic informed Eagleburger that the Yugoslav Government found USG proposal
for the Dragon missile sale was unacceptable, and therefore had to cancel its order. He
added that “it is obvious that the leaders of the U.S. want an independent Yugoslavia,
but when it comes to practical application, there is always a tremendous burden of
procedural problems.” (Telegram 7520 from Belgrade, October 5; National Archives, RG

Yugoslavia
Vujatovic noted that during his talks today he had gained the impres-
sion that the American system was quite complicated. Though it pre-
sented problems to the Yugoslavs they would try to adapt to the system
somehow. In return he hoped that the Americans would show patience
and openmindedness with the Yugoslavs during the initial phase. (C)
Mr. Aaron emphasized that the US wished to pursue its military
relationship with Yugoslavia in a confidential manner. While at times
this was difficult the US was determined to do it. (S)
General Vujatovic observed that in the past there had been some
unfortunate experiences with leaks; he hoped this could be avoided
because they had had a negative impact on relations. Turning to the
question of past problems and misunderstandings, he remarked that
sometimes it was difficult to know whether these were a consequence
of the US system or whether they had a deeper political meaning. (S)
Mr. Aaron emphasized that this Administration did not send signals
that way. Noting that the weapons procurement system was a compli-
cated process, he reiterated that we did not use our military relations
to convey political signals. If the US had a political message to transmit
it would talk directly to the Yugoslav government, but it would not
use the military supply relationship for this purpose. (S)
General Vujatovic stated that he was very pleased to hear this. (U)
In closing, Mr. Aaron said he hoped to see General Vujatovic again
either in Yugoslavia or in the States and noted that now that Yugoslavia
and the US had a military relationship, perhaps they would see more
of each other. (C)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
271.
Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State for Security
Assistance, Science, and Technology (Benson) to Secretary of
State Vance1
Washington, October 17, 1979
SUBJECT
Trip to Yugoslavia
As you know I spent two and a half days last week in Yugoslavia,
primarily to listen to the Yugoslav’s views of the Westinghouse Nuclear
Power Plant project, a joint project of the Slovenia and Croatia federa-
tions.2 I also discussed the Foreign Military Sales program at some
length with Ambassador Eagleburger. Among others, my colleagues
and I met with the Presidents of Croatia and Slovenia, the Energy
Ministers of the two Republics, the Yugoslav Managers of the Project
as well as with Ambassador Eagleburger and members of his staff.3
My trip to Yugoslavia followed a visit Under Secretary Hodges and I
made to Pittsburgh to listen to Westinghouse’s side of the story.
Several points in the Westinghouse matter are now quite clear:
—The contract, signed in 1974 with some push from President
Nixon, is now in serious difficulties. The project is 80% completed, 18–
24 months behind schedule, and Westinghouse is suffering a serious
cash flow squeeze due to high inflation during the life of the contract.
—The two parties are heading for a major legal imbroglio which
will be of no long-term benefit to either and which will undoubtedly
be a burden on good Yugoslav-US relations. It could result in lengthy
arbitration during which construction could be halted, resulting in
serious political-economic problems for Westinghouse.
—In a continued effort to head off the potential legal confrontation,
I believe the US Government should extend its good offices to both
Copies were sent to Newsom, Aaron, Vest, and Eagleburger.
dispute between Westinghouse and the Yugoslav authorities regarding the Krsko nuclear
power plant. In telegram 7797 from Belgrade, October 17, the Embassy reported that
the “visit has calmed the waters—at least for now.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central
Foreign Policy File, D790481–0525)
3 Benson met with Croatian President Flekovic on October 12. (Memorandum of
conversation, October 12; National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Under Secretary for
Security Assistance, Science, and Technology, Chron Files, Speeches, and Papers of Lucy
Chron, October 1979) She met with Slovenian President Vratusa later that day. (Memoran-
dum of conversation, October 12; ibid.)

Yugoslavia
parties. My trip with Luther Hodges to Pittsburgh and my trip to
Yugoslavia were made to see if we could head off this confrontation
by helping both sides find ways to resolve their problems without
resorting to arbitration.
These efforts in the first instance should include (a) maintaining
pressure on both sides to work out mutually satisfactory resolutions,
(b) urge Export-Import Bank to offer an acceptable refinancing arrange-
ment and (c) convince Westinghouse to complete the project in early
1981. There are other remedies possible such as direct USG involvement
in procurement of essential components, but we should keep these
possibilities in abeyance until we see how well our other efforts will
work. I have already talked with Gordon C. Hurlbert, President of
Westinghouse Power Systems Company since my return. I emphasized
to him the importance we attach to the achievement of an amicable
solution not to mention the stake Westinghouse has in this matter if
it has any hopes of obtaining future contracts in Yugoslavia (and per-
haps even in the Third World). While of course the USG has no legal
standing in this matter, I am convinced, as was Ambassador
Eagleburger, that the Yugoslavs welcomed our trip and our offer of
good offices. As for Westinghouse, I believe that the Corporate Manage-
ment recognizes the assistance the Department has extended in all
parts of the world (e.g. Korea, Philippines) in order to channel sizeable
contracts to an American manufacturer.
—You need not be burdened with the details of the dispute. Bas-
ically, the Yugoslavs wish to have the project completed as soon as
possible (original contract called for operations in 1979—“on the line
in 79”. Now at best it will be 1981). Westinghouse needs cash since
the project has cost much more ($230 million) than originally expected.
Beyond that, both sides have a myriad of complaints of differing magni-
tudes against each other. We think these could be settled amicably if
both sides could achieve their principal objectives.
As for the FMS, there can be no question that Ambassador
Eagleburger’s complaints concerning the Dragon case have validity.
As in the Westinghouse matter, an earlier alert might have prevented
the current situation. The Dragon case is a good illustration of the need
for an Embassy to closely monitor the implementation process of FMS
cases. (We all need to watch implementation of major cases more
closely.) There is practically no chance for that being done effectively
in Washington, given the wide dispersion of responsibilities among
agencies. The Ambassador was reluctant, as are most of our Chiefs of
Mission, to add to his staff, but the importance of having the critical
sales “go right” outweigh in my mind the costs of an additional staff
member. I think Ambassador Eagleburger would agree.
Although we obviously have not managed the FMS program satis-
factorily, I believe the Ambassador feels that the Yugoslav military-to-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
US-military relationships are still improving. I have the same feeling
after talking to Col. General Vujatovic on Tuesday4 and that is, after
all, what is important. But we’d better not have another fiasco.
I will keep you posted on further developments.
4 Benson met with Vujatovic on October 16 to discuss the Foreign Military Sale
relationship with Yugoslavia. (Memorandum of conversation, October 16; ibid.)
272.
Telegram From the Embassy in Yugoslavia to the
Department of State1
8210. Military handle as Specat Exclusive. State for Under Secretary
Benson frm Ambassador. Subject: Dragon. Refs: A) Belgrade 79862 B)
State 280014.3
1. S-entire text.
2. I saw General Pekic on Oct. 31 to discuss Dragon. I told him
that since he had been personally involved in the Dragon case, I wanted
to give him my personal apologies for the way the case had been
handled and to assure him that there had been no repeat no political
Exdis. Also sent Immediate to DOD ASD/ISA and USCINCEUR. Printed from a copy
that was received in the White House Situation Room.
nian Embassy reception celebrating the Romanian Armed Forces, General Pekic said
“the Dragon system is right for the Yugoslav armed forces” but that General Ljubicic
canceled the purchase because he believed “the damned Americans are playing politics
with us.” Pekic said that he would be willing to raise the issue again with Ljubicic “if
we could give him a peg on which to hang his approach.” Eagleburger wrote that he
had decided to talk to Pekic “hat in hand—and say to him that I want him to understand
that it is not ‘politics’ but bureaucratic bumbling on our part which has put us in this
the 1,000 Dragon missiles were “still available and can be delivered to aerial port of
embarkation within thirty days of receipt of GOY signature on LOA.” Benson agreed
that Eagleburger should talk to Pekic and concluded that “obviously, given the past
history of the problem, we do not want to press the GOY to buy the Dragon. What we
want to accomplish is to convey to them that in this case as in other FMS cases we are
willing to do our best to meet Yugoslav needs.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central
Foreign Policy File, D790491–0206)

Yugoslavia
motive behind our escalating cost quotations. I pointed out that the
LOA on the 1,000 Dragon purchase was still valid, and would remain
so until the end of the year. Thus, if the Yugoslavs were to change
their minds, the 1,000 missiles were still available.
3. General Pekic replied that he had always believed that the reason
for the change in price quotations was inflation, and that there was no
political motivation behind our actions. But, he said, there were some
(he clearly meant Ljubicic) in the Yugoslav military who did not agree,
and thought we had been playing games with the Yugoslavs. He added
that General Ljubicic would not repeat not be prepared to reconsider
the Yugoslav decision on Dragon this year, but that the GOY might
“come back to the Dragon or TOW” next year. He admitted that the
Yugoslavs were to some degree at fault because—given concerns over
the need to notify Congress—they had not reacted fast enough when
we first made our offer. It is now time, he said, to forget our problems
over the Dragon, to learn some lessons from the experience, and to
move on to further cooperation.
4. With regard to the future, the General made three points:
A. He reiterated their desire for modern electronic warfare equip-
ment and complained about our unwillingness to sell the Yugoslavs
sophisticated GEA. (I understand that the Yugoslavs agreed at the
recent Washington meetings to present us a list of specific electronic
warfare needs.)
B. On anti-tank weaponry, he indicated that their interest in the
Viper remains high. He acknowledged that even though this system
would probably be denied them for the present, they would be very
interested in an advanced or follow-on Dragon system. (I told him that
I had no knowledge of plans for an improved Dragon.)
C. On radars, he said that he could see no reason why the U.S.
should withhold up to date equipment from Yugoslavia, since we know
it would never be used against us. Aside from the air defense radars
now under negotiation, he indicated an urgent need for an anti-aircraft
fire control system such as “Skyguard” for adaptation to weapons in
the 30–40 mm class (knowledge nil here on this system). The General
further stated that they would be happy to give a manufacturer their
required technical specifications for a fire control system to see if any-
thing could be worked out. If none of this is possible, he would like
us to provide a list of radar systems adaptable to 30–40 mm anti-aircraft
guns and allow them to decide for themselves which most suited
their needs.
5. Comment: We can forget about Dragon sales to Yugoslavia, at
least for the time being. Pekic’s statement that Ljubicic would not
reconsider this year was straightforward and unqualified, and would
not have been made unless he knew whereof he spoke. Nor do I see

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
any purpose to be served by now asking to see Ljubicic. That would
only reveal our anxiety level, lead to another turn down, and expose
us to another series of complaints about our lack of trust as demon-
strated by our refusal to consider sales of our most modern equipment.
6. It is interesting, however, that Pekic left the door open for a
return to Dragon (or TOW) sometime next year. It may be that, in
advance of Pekic’s visit to the US next spring, we can raise the question
again so that he can pursue it while he is in Washington. This is a
possibility we should keep in mind as we prepare for the visit.
7. In classic Yugoslav fashion, we are now beginning to see an
effort to use our (or at least my) embarrassment as a lever to get us to
agree to the sale of sophisticated equipment we have disapproved
before. While that is a game we should not play, and while I do not
argue that we should give them the neutron bomb, I do suggest that
Washington take a hard look at whether there are any areas where we
could move the limits forward a bit. Specifically, if there is anything
we can do in the three areas mentioned by Pekic (para 4, above), it
could go far to remove or at least diminish whatever distrust Ljubicic
still harbors. We seem to have come through the Dragon affair with
only moderate—and repairable—damage. The objective now ought to
be to demonstrate the accuracy of our claim that what happened was
a consequence of misunderstanding, not deliberate policy. We can best
do that by finding other areas of cooperation and making them work.
Eagleburger

Yugoslavia
273.
Telegram From the Embassy in Yugoslavia to the
Department of State1
8762. Subject: (U) Secretary Vance’s Visit to Yugoslavia—Briefing
Materials: Overview.
1. S-entire text
2. This message provides for Secretary Vance our overview assess-
ment of the current Yugoslav scene.2
3. You will find Yugoslav leaders deeply troubled by the current
world scene. They see detente in jeopardy, a quickening arms race, a
deepening world economic crisis, a widening North-South gap, and
unsettling instability in key areas such as Iran. They are concerned by
Soviet intentions, the increasing resort to force and military intervention
around the world, and what they see as indecisive leadership in the
West. Finally, they sense, despite brave public words about the Havana
Non-Aligned Summit, that Yugoslav influence in the non-aligned
world may have begun a slow decline. The country is in the throes of
severe economic problems, including high inflation, excessive indus-
trial growth and a severe trade imbalance, with a substantial rise in
imports while exports stagnate. This has been seriously aggravated by
the Montenegrin earthquake last spring and floods this fall, and a poor
wheat crop plus ever-increasing oil prices. Inflation is running at about
25 per cent, and correction measures have thus far failed measurably
to help. Shortages in consumer goods—by no means as severe as else-
where in Eastern Europe—are causing grumbling, not least, because
in this consumerist society the populace is unaccustomed to austerity.
Secret; Priority. Vance was scheduled to travel to Belgrade December 14–15. His trip to
Yugoslavia and Romania was canceled after the U.S. Embassy in Tehran was seized by
protesters on November 4 and U.S. diplomats taken hostage. See Document 219.
2 The Embassy drafted a list of possible topics of discussions between Vance and
the Yugoslav leadership in telegram 8287 from Belgrade, November 5. (National Archives,
November 28, the Embassy reported that negotiations for a new consular convention
between the two countries were complete except for the status of dual nationals. Yugo-
slavia, which required compulsory military service of all male citizens over the age of
18, had in the past arrested U.S. citizens with dual citizenship visiting the country. The
Yugoslav Government informed the Embassy that a new law on military obligations,
which was to be adopted shortly, exempted dual citizens from military service under
certain conditions. The Embassy recommended an exchange of separate but binding
letters on the issue, which, if agreed to by the Yugoslav Government, would allow Vance
to sign the convention while in Belgrade. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
Policy File, D790547–0680)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
Finally, there is the ever-present anxiety about the future after Tito,
now exacerbated by unease over the approaching demise of Brezhnev.
4. Yet in many respects Yugoslavia continues to be a rather amazing
success story. Robust real economic growth continues at about 7 per
cent annually. The people enjoy access to a wide range of consumer
goods and seem to find little difficulty in paying the skyrocketing
prices for them. Travel to the West—and the input of Western ideas
here—is virtually unhindered. Intellectual and academic exchanges
with the West grow annually; exchanges with the US are especially
valued. There are few barriers to artistic creativity. In sum, the “quality
of life” for the average Yugoslav is good, and he expects it to get
better. If it doesn’t, a post-Tito regime could find itself facing political
consequences. But the converse is true: so long as the standard of living
continues perceptibly to improve, this will be an important element of
stability after Tito.
ton, gingerly concludes that Yugoslavia is only “marginally” more
[garble—likely?] to make it through a transition period without major
turmoil. We, too, are guarded in our prognosis—but continue to believe
that the centripetal forces in post-Tito Yugoslavia will prevail over the
centrifugal. The forces acting to hold the country together include an
acutely felt “hang together or hang separately” syndrome; economic
imperatives; an experienced, pragmatic—if undistinguished—collec-
tive leadership accustomed to brokering regional interests: and the
vested interest of the “new class” which has expanded since Djilas’
classic exposition in 1953 to include an acquisitive, consumerist, thor-
oughly Western-oriented middle class.
6. The greatest danger is nationalism. Despite Tito’s heroics, inter-
communal hatreds have not been extinguished in the 34 years since
WWII. Small but fanatic and determined emigre extremist groups stand
eager—perhaps with KGB help—to foment and exploit internal tur-
moil. They are too weak, and sympathy for terrorism within the country
too slight, to create by themselves a major problem within the country
after Tito dies. They could, nevertheless, exploit a deteriorating situa-
tion and, with Soviet help, pose a potentially serious problem.
7. Two factors, difficult to predict, will greatly influence the situa-
tion when Tito dies: the domestic economic situation, and the interna-
tional political scene. As indicated, Yugoslavia is now facing serious
economic problems, but it has survived similar difficulties in the past.
The Yugoslav nightmare is that the Tito and Brezhnev transitions coin-
cide, although Tito seems in much better health than Brezhnev. While
3 See Document 269.

Yugoslavia
the outlook for the latter appears to be dimming rapidly, Tito is still
able to function well, but increasingly focuses ever more narrowly on
foreign affairs. There is no successor-designate. The collective leader-
ship machinery which Tito will leave behind him is designed to prevent
the emergence of any new Caesar. But history indicates that sooner or
later, and probably sooner, some faction will emerge to take charge,
followed by a rise to pre-eminence of a leader from within that faction.
But we cannot at this stage predict who he will be.
8. The United States can influence events here. We support the
unity, territorial integrity and independence of Yugoslavia. That sup-
port is visible and welcome. If, in the time remaining to us before Tito
dies, as well as at the time of the event, the United States is seen as a
powerful friend and an effective force for stability in Europe, this
will aid the post-Tito leaders enormously. Our objective in the pre-
succession period is to weave a web of relationships—political, eco-
nomic, cultural, and military—which projects the image of a steadfast
friend and gives substance to the bilateral relationship.
9. President Tito, at 87, has had severe health problems, but contin-
ues amazingly vigorous. Over the past 4–5 years he has progressively
shed oversight over day-to-day management of the government and
party and has focused on foreign affairs. His is still the last word,
however, on major personnel assignments and indeed on any major
issue which cannot be resolved at a lower level.
10. The ever-pragmatic Tito continues to tinker with the succession
machinery, which now consists of a 24-man party presidency and a
nine-man state presidency. Tito heads both for life, and also holds the
post of Supreme Commander of the Armed Forces. The composition
of both presidencies reflects a delicate national balance between Yugo-
slavia’s six constituent republics and two autonomous provinces.
11. The two presidencies contain almost all of the most important
personalities. In general, they are a tough, able, but not very brilliant
group. Most important is a small group of “1941 fighters,” including
the Croatian Party Baron Vladimir Bakaric; Serb Minister of Defense
Nikola Ljubicic, Serb Milos Minic, Principal Foreign Policy Adviser;
Petar Stambolic, Senior Serbian Party figure; and Admiral Branko
Mamula, Croatian Serb who has recently been appointed Armed Forces
Chief of Staff. The most visible younger men are Slovene Stane Dolanc
and Bosnian Croat Branko Mikulic, contenders for day-to-day Party
direction.
12. Since Edvard Kardelj’s death last February, no one has been
designated dauphin or has seized that position. Tito has seen to that.
Speculation about friction between Dolanc and Mikulic, and between
other members of the leadership, may have substance, but we have
lamentably little hard information on which to make judgments. For

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
the moment, Dolanc’s career has evidently met a check, and this (at
least temporarily) has favored Mikulic, but neither can be counted out
(or, for that matter, in) over the long run.
13. Yugoslav-Soviet relations: Since late 1976 serious strains have
developed in Yugoslav-Soviet relations. They arise out of three broad,
interacting processes: A) Widening policy differences over Africa, the
International Communist Movement, NAM, and other issues; B) Yugo-
slavia’s rapidly expanding relations with China; and C) Yugoslavia’s
growing economic and political interest in expanded ties with the West
and particularly the US.
14. Over the past year, despite the Brezhnev-Tito summit in May,
policy differences have sharpened. Soviet support for the Vietnamese
invasion of Cambodia, increased tensions with Bulgaria over Mace-
donia, and continuing Cuban attempts to maneuver NAM into an
informal alliance with Moscow have reinforced Yugoslav perceptions
of a Soviet challenge to basic Yugoslav interests. Thus, the LCY has
reportedly issued guidance identifying Moscow as “enemy number
one”, and officials have expressed concern about “Soviet expansionist
tendencies” and the possibility of Bulgaria becoming a “Balkan Cuba”
or “Balkan Vietnam”.
15. Reinforcing these strains lie deep and growing Yugoslav anxi-
eties over the post-Brezhnev future, the impact of the Soviet succession
on the Yugoslav succession, and the possibility that a new, untested,
and unsure Soviet leadership could behave in dangerous and unpre-
dictable ways. Despite these apprehensions, Yugoslav options appear
limited; Yugoslav-Soviet relations are likely to remain a shifting blend
of cooperation and confrontation. Their essentially adversary relation-
ship will continue to be tempered by heavy military supply dependence
on the Soviet Union (unless we can do something about this), a burden-
some trade deficit with the West, and a consequent increase in trade
with the East, residual ideological sentiment, and a prudent geographic
and political interest in minimizing tensions where possible.
16. US-Yugoslav relations: In this context, Yugoslavia has increas-
ingly looked to the US to provide balance, diplomatic support, and an
alternative source of trade and military supply.4 This, as well as the
perception of a more favorable US attitude toward the NAM, parallel
interests on broad international issues (NAM, Cambodia, China, to
some degree Africa), and our own interest in creating a web of relation-
ships which will ease an inevitably difficult transition period, have led
4 On November 16, the Embassy provided briefing materials on the status of U.S.-
Yugoslav military cooperation. (Telegram 8556 from Belgrade, November 16; National

Yugoslavia
to a rapid expansion of our political, economic, military, cultural and
academic relations over the past two years. Much yet remains to be
accomplished to establish a relationship of mutual trust with the Yugo-
slav military; bureaucratic blundering on both sides and a residue of
suspicion complicate our efforts to broaden the relationship, but
progress has been made and our mutual interests require that more
be done.
17. Chinese-Yugoslav relations: In the year since Hua’s visit to
Yugoslavia and Romania (August, 1978), the drama and expectations
have diminished. What remains is a record of solid accomplishment
in consolidating and expanding Party and state ties; disappointed (but
not abandoned) hopes for increased trade and economic cooperation
based on mutual advantage; abiding but less strident Soviet concern
and displeasure over Yugoslavia’s role in strengthening China’s diplo-
matic presence in the Balkans; and mutual recognition of the impor-
tance, limitations, and usefulness of their relationship.
18. For the US, the expansion of Yugoslav-Chinese ties is a positive
development in that it encourages China’s opening to the world, acts
as a marginal restraint on Soviet behavior in the Balkans, and reinforces
US-Yugoslav relations and perceptions of shared policy interest. Fur-
ther steady expansion of their relations can be expected, but the pace
and scope will be limited by Yugoslav concern about unduly provoking
Moscow, economic realities, and differences in their systems, outlooks,
and ultimate political objectives.
19. NAM Havana Summit: The Yugoslavs, having defined the
critical issues at Havana to be those of “principle,” returned from
Havana claiming victory. The Cubans, on the other hand, played a
different game, ignoring ideological issues and promising flexibility
while hammering away on the substantive issues with telling, radical
effect. Only time will tell who won; whether the condemnation of the
Middle East negotiating process and the issue of Egypt’s suspension
from the NAM will be rendered moot by negotiating progress; whether
Cuban behavior at Havana so irritated the “silent majority” that Castro
will not be able to manipulate the movement over the next three years.
What seems clear, however, is that Yugoslavia emerged from the sum-
mit with diminished influence. Diminished because it chose to fight
only on “principle”, ceding the battlefield to Castro on almost all other
issues. Diminished, because even on those issues where it did fight, it
did not win clear-cut victories, despite the investment of enormous
effort and Tito’s personal prestige. Diminished because Yugoslavia, a
relatively small, relatively developed, white, European, and northern
country has inevitably begun to lose relevance within the NAM. At
some point, Yugoslav leaders may begin to reevaluate their heavy
commitment to the NAM, but certainly not until after Tito’s passing.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
20. Yugoslav expectations from your visit: The Yugoslavs will wish
to hear your view on European security issues, above all the prospects
for detente. You will have a particularly good opportunity to discuss
with them decisions taken at the NATO Ministerial, especially the
reasons why theater nuclear modernization is so critical for the mainte-
nance of the European military balance on which peace depends. The
Yugoslavs will be glad to exchange views on the situation in China
and in SE Asia, where our positions are closely parallel; they may raise
Korea, if so, they will tell you the North Koreans have become really
quite reasonable and suggest that we try to do a deal with them; on
the Middle East, they will urge you to begin dealing directly with the
PLO and will be keenly alert for any indications of evolution of our
policy in that direction. If there is time, South African issues could come
up—Yugoslav support for national liberation movements is virtually
unqualified, but they are deeply concerned about Cuban (and hence
Soviet) penetration of the continent and will welcome a genuine solu-
tion in Zimbabwe-Rhodesia if that indeed appears in prospect.
21. On bilateral issues, they may present their case on the Krsko
nuclear power plant project. They will almost certainly urge greater
balance in our trade, press for continuing efforts to suppress anti-
Yugoslav terrorism, ask that we be more forthcoming in our military
sales relationship, and seek a reiteration of our policy of support for
Yugoslavia’s unity, territorial integrity and independence. Above all,
they will welcome your reassurance that US foreign policy toward
Yugoslavia rests on a clear and steady perception of our national inter-
est, that our support for Yugoslavia’s integrity predates the present
administration and will continue after it precisely because it corre-
sponds to our most vital national interest—a stable, peaceful, non-
Soviet-dominated Europe.
Scanlan
274.
Editorial Note
On January 12, 1980, Assistant to the President for National Security
Affairs Zbigniew Brzezinski informed President Jimmy Carter that the
basic contingency plan for Allied support for Yugoslavia following
Yugoslav President Josip Broz Tito’s death had been completed. (See
Document 275.) Tito’s advanced age and deteriorating health had set
the stage for planning for his death for several years, with a first
National Security Council contingency plan produced and adopted

Yugoslavia
plan. A December 4 Central Intelligence Agency memorandum
reported that the interagency committee decided a rewrite of the 1976
plan was required. (Central Intelligence Agency, Office of Support
1979, another meeting of the interagency committee produced a first
draft of an updated contingency plan, which included a list of possible
U.S. actions in the wake of Tito’s death and a memorandum for Presi-
dent Carter concerning the effect of Tito’s death on Yugoslavia. (Central
Intelligence Agency, Office of Support Services (DI), Job 82T00150R,
Production Case Files, Box 6, Folder 143, Meeting on Post-Tito Yugo-
On November 2, 1979, the Department requested that the Embassy
in Belgrade provide its own recommendation for the public statements
President Carter would make at the time President Tito died. (Telegram
Embassy wrote that U.S. Ambassador to Yugoslavia Lawrence
Eagleburger “is nonetheless prepared to live with what you have
[drafted] with one exception. He feels that the last paragraph, which
reaffirms our support for independence, territorial integrity and unity
is too weak and should be strengthened. What he suggests (which
follows) he suspects will be too strong for your liking but points out
that State ought to be pushing for as strong a commitment as possible,
leaving it to the others, if they feel they must, to soften it.” (Telegram
Foreign Policy File, D790503–0859)
Tito’s health continued to deteriorate throughout November and
December 1979. By January 1980, the sclerosis of his veins and arteries
and the developing gangrene in his left leg forced his doctors to ampu-
tate it as a last resort measure to save his life. A January 19, 1980,
“Special Analysis” in the CIA’s National Intelligence Daily concluded
that a smooth transfer of power from Tito to the collegial system of
leadership established since the 1974 constitution would take place.
The Soviet invasion of Afghanistan at the end of December 1979 had
heightened the perceived Soviet threat and would “serve to hold the
new Yugoslav leader together during the first few months.” The Agency
believed that in the short term, “the Soviets will not intervene militar-
ily” and that “other forms of Soviet meddling or pressure during this
period would only reinforce Yugoslav unity.” It acknowledged that in
the long term “we are less sanguine about the prospects of Yugoslav
unity—and Soviet restraint.” (Central Intelligence Agency, Office of
Support Services (DI), Job 82T00466R, Intelligence Publication Files

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
275.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, undated
SUBJECT
Yugoslavia: Contingency Planning (S)
In addition to our own contingency plans to be implemented upon
Tito’s death, at the quadripartite meetings the Political Directors of the
FRG, France, Britain and the US, together with the Military Officers of
these countries associated with the quadripartite meetings, have been
engaged in an ongoing study of assistance to Yugoslavia in the event
of Soviet pressure on or intervention in Yugoslavia. (S)
A basic contingency document has been worked out. Recent work
has concentrated on two problems:
—The resupply situation. Our studies show this to be very
problematic.
—The coordination of supplies of new systems to Yugoslavia. It
is clear from our studies that internal bureaucracies in all countries,
including the US, are inhibiting coordination. (S)
The Political Directors have been working hard to overcome the
difficulties. At the next quadripartite meeting, to be held January 31,
a report will be made on progress in cutting through this red tape.
The Military Officers will also report to the Political Directors what
aid could be offered to Yugoslavia in the first weeks of any pressure,
and by whom.2 Their study is focusing on three questions in particular:
(1) what aid could be offered in toto; (2) which countries could offer
which items; (3) how best to divide the pie. (S)
indicating he saw it.
informed the military officers at the quadripartite meetings of Major General Bowman’s
assessment of immediate and long-term Yugoslav military needs in case of a crisis.
Bowman wrote to his counterparts: “If in the near future a crisis should ensue in Yugo-
slavia, it might be necessary to demonstrate to Yugoslav leaders in some concrete way
that the West supports Yugoslav independence. One way to do that would be to ship
some high priority military equipment in the first week or two.” Bowman went on to
suggest that “if the crisis were bad enough and the Yugoslavs requested” the United
States could provide Stinger, Dragon, and TOW missiles, as well as “tie US AWACS
radar downlink into the Yugoslav air defense net.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central
Foreign Policy File, P870104–0252)

Yugoslavia
276.
Memorandum From Stephen Larrabee of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Assistant
for National Security Affairs (Aaron)1
Washington, January 17, 1980
SUBJECT
The main purpose of this mini-SCC on Yugoslavia should be to
ensure that the USG is well-organized and prepared in case Tito should
die in the near future. There are three main papers which should
be reviewed:
1. State’s revised contingency plan to be implemented on Tito’s death
(Tab A).2 It contains a checklist of important steps to be taken in the
immediate aftermath of Tito’s death, a list of the delegation to the
funeral, and condolence messages, public statements, etc. I have
checked it over and I think it touches all the important bases. You need
only review the checklist. (The messages have been cleared with the
speechwriters.)
2. A State paper on short-term policy goals (the first two-three months
after Tito’s death) and steps we are taking in terms of contingency
planning (Tab B).3 You should glance over the parts underlined in red
and ask George Vest to briefly summarize the paper and the steps.
In addition to the State paper on short-term policy goals:4
—the Department has prepared and updated during the past 10
years a USG Contingency Study which addresses scenarios for internal
disintegration and Soviet/WP threats and/or invasion. This study is
a useful reference but is too long and unwieldy to be a useful policy-
making tool;
the first page reads: “DA has seen.”
2 Attached at Tab A is a January 16 memorandum from Tarnoff to Brzezinski which
included: a preliminary checklist in the eventuality of Tito’s death, suggested members
of the funeral delegation (to be led by the President); draft condolence messages; a draft
memorandum to the Secretaries of State and Defense, the Attorney General, and the
DCI drawing attention to the danger of anti-Yugoslav terrorism; and a draft letter to
Brezhnev cautioning against interference in Yugoslav internal affairs. In a January 25
memorandum to Brzezinski, Brement and Larrabee argued that the letter to Brezhnev
be dropped from the Yugoslav contingency plan; Brzezinski agreed. (Carter Library,
National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Europe, USSR, and East/West, Larrabee Subject
3 Vest submitted the paper the following day to the Vance. See Document 277.
4 Aaron wrote in the margin next to the following three points: “What is actionable?”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
—EURhasformedaninteragencygrouptoreviewtheseplans,bring
them fully up-to-date, and prepare necessary decision documents;
—under the aegis of this group PM is preparing a more detailed
analysis of military options for the US and NATO which will be ready
by January 25. (S)
3. The Quad paper on military contingencies in case of Soviet pressure
(Tab C).5 You should ask General Bowman (DOD/ISA) to briefly
review the status of this paper and DOD contingency plans for supply-
ing Yugoslavia in the first weeks of any crisis. (C)
As you know, the Political Directors’ meeting will be on January
24–25. To date the other three Allies have not provided a very useful
list of equipment which they could supply Yugoslavia. Our objective at
the Political Directors’ meeting should be to get agreement on what each ally
would supply in the first week of a crisis and to push the other three to do
more. You should stress that we want to be in a good position to respond
to any Yugoslav request for aid. However, while we need to be able
to respond quickly to any Yugoslav request for aid, we should also be
mindful of strong Yugoslav sensitivities about NATO discussions of contin-
gency plans, which they fear will stimulate Warsaw Pact pressures. (See
in particular the cable at Tab D.)6 (S)
Three final points:
—You should task DOD to look into any changes in legislation that
might be necessary in order to respond to Yugoslavia’s requests quickly
and effectively. Otherwise, we may find that the Yugoslavs turn to us
with a request for a certain type of advanced equipment, i.e., The
Dragon, and we may not be able to supply it in time due to legislative
restrictions.7
—State should be tasked to look at the signaling process. The Yugo-
slavs are very sensitive about external involvement in their affairs and
do not want us to take any action that might provoke the Soviets. At
the same time they want to feel confident that they can rely on us if
they need to. We need to have a better idea of how we can signal our
willingness to help the Yugoslavs without getting too far out in front.
—CIA should be tasked to do a concise analysis of Soviet goals, tactics
and scenarios for intervention. To some extent they have done this in the
latest NIO but we need a separate policy-related study which focuses
solely on the Soviet angle.8 (S)
5 Tab C is not attached. Tarnoff forwarded the final paper, dated March 3, to
Brzezinski on March 6. See Document 284.
6 Tab D is not attached.
7 Aaron circled “Dragon,” and wrote in the margin “what do they want that we
can’t supply?”
8 Aaron underlined “the Soviet angle” and drew a question mark under. He also
wrote after this point: “Soviet reaction to P[resident] visit.”

Yugoslavia
277.
Briefing Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State
for European Affairs (Vest), the Director of Policy Planning
(Lake), and the Assistant Secretary of State for Politico-
Military Affairs (Bartholomew) to Secretary of State Vance1
Washington, January 18, 1980
SUBJECT
Yugoslavia, the Tito Succession, and the Afghan Crisis
The short-term prospects for an orderly transition following Tito’s
death are good—but we cannot be certain. A collective Presidency will
take over power, rotating jobs on an annual basis.
With their current preoccupation with Southwest Asia, the Soviets
may, particularly if they pursue an active Euro-detente policy, take a
reasonable, hands-off posture toward Yugoslavia.
However, the Soviets will view the post-Tito period as a singular
opportunity to influence Yugoslav policies in their favor. They will
pay special attention, through inducements and threats, to interest
groups within the government, party, and military establishments, and
may provide covert support to divisive elements.
The overriding Soviet objective will be to keep the Yugoslav Com-
munist Party in power, preferably with a leadership group more
friendly to Soviet interests than Tito has been. They would like to do
this without force or any appearance of Soviet intervention so that
any countermeasures by the U.S. and its NATO allies would appear
interventionist.
Afghanistan has united the Yugoslavs against the Soviet threat as
never before. This mood may relax in time, but, barring unforeseen
chaos, the Yugoslavs themselves will in the foreseeable future pose a
formidable obstacle to Soviet aspirations. Thus the immediate prospect
is for the country to hold together.
But we’re not certain how long this relatively stable situation will
prevail, and we’re concerned that none of the potential successors has
much stature. Tito set up a mechanism supposedly to help with the
succession, but he refused to let a single strong leader emerge. The
regime’s efforts to control, monitor, and eliminate opposition betray its
nervousness about separatists and Cominformists. Moreover, several
Secret. Drafted by McCormack, Barry, and Palmer on January 17; cleared by Harrison
and Kamman.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
factors such as emigre activity and national separatism may foster some
uncertainty and instability in the post-Tito period.
While the Yugoslavs will want our support, they will not welcome
a US or allied over-reaction. This would have the effect of undermining
Yugoslav confidence in their own ability to cope with the post-Tito
period and could provide the Soviets with pretexts to react in unhelpful
ways. They will even suspect that our expressions of concern are
designed to destabilize the country, perhaps to get the Communist
Party out of power. They will be particularly watchful about our will
to control any Yugoslav emigre activities in the West. Therefore, a
primary goal of US policy will be to ensure a calm US and allied
response, reflecting confidence in Yugoslavia’s stability and political
maturity.
U.S. Commitments, Plans, Studies, and Decisions
1. Neither we nor any other NATO members have made any direct
commitments to provide either men or material to Yugoslavia in the
event of a crisis or threats from the Soviets.
We have expressed “support” for Yugoslav independence and ter-
ritorial integrity during Tito’s 1978 visit to the U.S. Initially U.S. support
would come in the form of close political and economic ties and step-
ping up our modest military supply relationship if the Yugoslavs want
this. As the situation develops, we will want to consult closely with our
allies bilaterally, through the Quadripartite mechanism, and possibly
in NATO. However, we should bear in mind Yugoslav sensitivities
about NATO discussions focused on them, which they see as stimulat-
ing compensatory Warsaw Pact pressures. We should not undertake
detailed contingency planning in NATO, but confine ourselves to gen-
eral and confidential exchanges.
2. The Department has prepared and updated during the past
ten years a USG Contingency Study for Yugoslavia, which addresses
scenarios for internal disintegration and Soviet/WP threats and/or
invasion. This study is a useful reference but not a policymakers tool.
EUR has formed an interagency group to review these plans, bring them
fully up-to-date, and prepare necessary decision documents. Under
the aegis of this group, PM is preparing a more detailed analysis
of military options for the U.S. and NATO which will be ready by
January 25.
3. DOD is working on contingency plans to meet a situation in
which the Yugoslavs might ask us to provide increased military sup-
plies, logistical support. These plans will be ready shortly. (In a crisis,
the Yugoslavs can muster three million men in the field and another
three million auxiliaries.) They are less likely to look to the U.S. or the
NATO allies for a direct commitment of military forces, than for the
type of assistance mentioned above.

Yugoslavia
4. We have sent to the White House statements to be made and
actions to be taken immediately following Tito’s death, including a
possible message from the President to Brezhnev. We are seeking the
urgent views of Embassies Moscow and Belgrade on this latter issue
and will send you a separate memo on the considerations involved as
soon as possible.2 One of our recommendations is for a Presidential
statement, to be issued upon Tito’s death, which reaffirms in clear
terms our support for the independence, sovereignty, and unity of
Yugoslavia.
5. In the absence of a threat of Soviet intervention, we should
quietly encourage the post-Tito succession process to produce a new
unifying authority, while working with the Yugoslavs to support their
independence. We assume that if any crisis or Soviet threat develops,
the Yugoslavs will take the lead in telling us what they need and want,
and that we should not press U.S. assistance or guarantees beyond
what the Yugoslavs feel is useful.
At a mini-SCC meeting today chaired by Aaron there was strong
interagency endorsement for the general policy line set forth in this
memorandum. A number of specific tasks were assigned to ensure
that we are well prepared. We will keep you closely informed as this
work proceeds.
Embassy views on whether a letter from Carter to Brezhnev following Tito’s death would
be useful. The letter would stress the importance the U.S. Government attached to
Yugoslav non-alignment, independence, and territorial integrity, and stress U.S. Govern-
ment expectations of Soviet actions. The draft language reads in part: “You should
understand that any effort to exploit President Tito’s death to weaken Yugoslavia’s
internal cohesion or undermine Yugoslavia’s traditionally independent foreign policy
would be regarded by the United States as an unfriendly act, toward which we would
feel compelled to respond accordingly.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
cautioned against sending a letter before any Soviet threat to Yugoslavia. (National
welcomed the idea of a letter sent immediately following Tito’s death, but suggested
clarification of what constituted troublesome Soviet moves toward Yugoslavia. (Telegram

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
278.
Memorandum From the National Intelligence Officer for the
Soviet Union and Eastern Europe (Horelick) to the Deputy
Director of Central Intelligence (Carlucci)1
Washington, January 21, 1980
SUBJECT
Yugoslav Contingency Planning [classification not declassified]
1. On Friday morning, 18 January, I attended a Mini-SCC on Yugo-
slavia chaired by David Aaron. Attendees included Assistant Secretary
Vest, EUR/State, Jim Sienna and Maj. Gen. Bill Bowman, DoD, Lt. Gen.
John Pustay, JCS, as well as representatives from Treasury, and various
NSC staffers. [classification not declassified]
2. The purpose of the meeting was to lay down guidelines to
organize the government’s preparations for the contingency of Presi-
dent Tito’s death. An Interagency Working Group (IWG) at the Assist-
ant Secretary level headed by George Vest was established to coordinate
USG policy during the immediate period following Tito’s death.
Defense, CIA, Justice, Commerce, and Treasury will participate as
needed either in the full group or in special subgroups. I attended the
first meeting of that working group late Friday afternoon. [classification
not declassified]
3. A USG Contingency Study for Yugoslavia has been available
since shortly after the 1968 Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia and has
been periodically updated. This is a continuing operation. As part of
that planning exercise routine documents (official statements, messages
to the new Yugoslav leaders) have already been prepared. Special anti-
terrorism measures are being studied.2 [classification not declassified]
4. Because of the extreme sensitivity of any military or logistical
support contingency planning, this aspect of the preparations is being
very closely held to a small subgroup of the Interagency Working
Group on which we are represented. PM has been charged with prepar-
ing an updated military contingency planning document suitable for
uninitialed copy. Copies were sent to the Chairman of the NIC, D/OSR, and D/OPA.
2 See Document 274.

Yugoslavia
serving as a policymaking tool.3 An analysis of US and NATO options
should be ready for review by January 25. Meanwhile DoD is preparing
logistical contingency plans to meet the situation in which the Yugo-
slavs might ask us for increased military supplies.4 [classification not
declassified]
5. We have all been asked to keep a very low profile with respect
to any contingency military planning, the fact of which should not be
discussed publicly. Public discussion of such would be deeply resented
by the Yugoslavs and at this stage would be unnecessarily provocative
to the Soviets. Accordingly, while generally alerting relevant offices
and analysts in NFAC and keeping tabs on intelligence support work
that has already been commissioned in INR and DIA, I do not recom-
mend at this point the establishment of any formal mechanism for
intelligence support of military contingency planning. Once intelligence
requirements become clearer later this week, we can see whether ad
hoc responses will suffice or whether some more permanent mecha-
nism needs to be created. [classification not declassified]
6. The closest political monitoring of Yugoslavia is, of course, going
forward. For the time being, the only specific tasks laid on CIA by the
IWG were (a) to provide a brief update on the state of the Yugoslav
economy, with special reference to its credit standing. Work done by
OER in support of NIE 15–795 provides a solid basis for such a paper
and I have asked OER to provide a summary and update of the eco-
nomic section of that estimate for delivery to the IWG by COB today;
(b) DoD and CIA have been asked by David Aaron to provide him
with a report on the status of US-Yugoslav intelligence exchanges. To
the extent that such exchanges have occurred, they have been handled
primarily by DoD and Ambassador Eagleburger and I shall coordinate
a reply with State and DoD; (c) I assume also that the DDO will
be represented in some way in anti-terrorist planning which is now
3 On January 22, Bartholomew sent a memorandum to Vance in preparation for a
January 23 VBB luncheon meeting. At Tab 1 of the memorandum, covering Yugoslavia,
Bartholomew suggested that, while the immediate crisis brought on by Tito’s failing
health might have subsided, the additional time be used to “strengthen the West’s ties
with Yugoslavia in tangible ways” and “further prepare for post-Tito scenarios, including
covert or overt Soviet intervention.” The memorandum listed three areas of particular
attention: economic; military cooperation; and Soviet intervention scenarios. (Department
of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Cyrus R. Vance, Secretary of State—1977–1980,
memorandum to Brzezinski on January 22. (Carter Library, Brzezinski Donated Material,
discussion in the VBB was postponed to February 8.
5 See Document 269.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
underway and being coordinated through Bill Odom of the NSC Staff.
[classification not declassified]
7. Attached at Tab A is a preliminary checklist of activities which
the SCC has charged the IWG with conducting in connection with the
prospect of succession in Yugoslavia.6 [classification not declassified]
Arnold L. Horelick
6 Attached but not printed is a January 18 preliminary checklist of activities following
Tito’s death.
279.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, February 12, 1980
SUBJECT
Tito’s Health
It now appears that Tito is dying.2 You will have to decide who
will attend the funeral. In ordinary circumstances it would be a good
gesture for you to do so rather than send the Vice President. In the
current circumstances, however, the issue is more difficult.
If you go, Brezhnev may well be there. Whether you meet with
him or not will be a major issue. If you do not meet him, you will be
severely criticized for refusing to deal with the Soviets at a dangerous
time and you will bear the onus for any further deterioration in our
relationship. If you do meet with him, the meeting is likely to contribute
to a further aggravation of our relationship because of the positions
you will have to take. To have a different outcome will require that
2 Earlier on February 12, Brzezinski sent a memorandum to Carter informing him
that “CIA reports this morning that Marshal Tito’s health is rapidly failing. He will not
accept any food and takes very little fluid. The fluid intake and his heart medicine are
both adversely affecting his kidneys. The prognosis is poor. We will be reviewing our
contingency plans for the event of his death.” Carter initialed the memorandum indicating
he saw it. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski

Yugoslavia
either the Soviets change their position on the Afghan invasion (which
seems highly unlikely, particularly in that context) or you will have to
modify your positions which will raise charges of zigzagging and
undermine our efforts with our allies, the Islamic countries and the
Olympics.
These considerations, plus the problem of squaring a trip to Yugo-
slavia with your position on not going to New Hampshire3 lead me to
conclude that you should probably plan on sending the Vice President.
We need to begin planning soon so I would appreciate your
decision.4
Agree, the Vice President should go
No, I will go
time, he announced that he must postpone campaign travels due to the ongoing situation
Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and with the Iranian hostage crisis continuing, Carter
told a group of editors and news directors at the White House, that he continued to
limit “the involvement of myself as a clearly identifiable, partisan campaigner” and that
even when he might leave Washington, D.C., he would not “want to go to a fundraising
event for myself, or to participate in a strictly partisan event, until I consider the alleviation
of these crises to be adequate.” (Public Papers: Carter, 1980, Book I, p. 90) Carter won
the New Hampshire primary on February 26, with 47 percent of the vote. Senator Edward
Kennedy won 37 percent.
4 Neither of the two options were checked. Carter wrote at the bottom of the page:
“My present inclination is to send Mondale and my mother.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
280.
Memorandum From Stephen Larrabee of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, February 13, 1980
SUBJECT
VBB: Contingency Planning for Yugoslavia (U)
Public Posture: As Ambassador Loncar emphasized to you the other
day,2 the Yugoslavs are concerned that Western press speculation may
overheat the political atmosphere and will play into the Soviet’s hands.
(See also Yugoslav Defense Minister Ljubicic’s remarks to General
Graves at Tab A).3In the coming days and weeks we need to avoid
alarmist commentary. Our public posture should be that we have confidence
in the Yugoslav’s ability to handle the transition successfully. You should
emphasize the need within the USG to hew very closely to this line. (C)
Head of Delegation: Vance, Shulman, and Vest think that the Presi-
dent should represent the US at the funeral. Ambassador Eagleburger
also strongly believes that the President’s attendance is in the U.S.
interest.4 I concur. As Larry points out, what the US does immediately
and in the weeks ahead will have a major psychological and substantive
impact on Yugoslav perceptions—particularly in light of the Soviet
invasion of Afghanistan. The President’s attendance would send an
important signal to the Yugoslavs—and to the Soviets—of our support
for Belgrade. Conversely, his failure to attend the funeral might cause
doubts about our support. I suggest that you recommend the President
attend the funeral. (C)
Meeting with Brezhnev: If the President does go to the funeral and
Brezhnev also attends, this raises the question of how to handle any
possible meeting between the two. A meeting would be impossible to
Wing of the White House. They discussed Tito’s health, U.S. support for Yugoslavia,
Afghanistan, and the Non-Aligned Movement. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs,
3 Not attached. The Embassy in Belgrade reported the conversation in telegram
1089, February 12. Ljubicic complained to Graves that coverage in the Western press of
the situation in Yugoslavia “strengthens the hands of the Soviets, who are looking for
ways to demonstrate that Yugoslavia is moving toward the West.” (National Archives,
belief that Carter should lead the U.S. delegation to Tito’s funeral. (National Archives,

Yugoslavia
avoid. State feels that it should be low profile and perfunctory.5 This
is probably impossible. If the President goes, Marshall, Bob and I feel
that he should emphasize our concerns about Afghanistan and that he
should above all give the impression of firmness and determination.
(Alternatively, Vance could meet with Gromyko if the Vice President
heads the delegation.) If possible, bilaterals with the allies should pre-
cede any meeting with Brezhnev, but we should avoid a Quad type
meeting since this would offend the Yugoslavs. (C)
Coordination with the Allies: Over the next few days, the allies will
be looking to us for indications of what we plan to do and we need
to convey to them our views. If we do not, the allies may get out
in front—Giscard leading the pack—and attempt to act as mediators
between the US and the Soviets. The Soviets could try to play on this
lack of unity within the allies to further split the US from its allies.
The President needs to convey our thinking to the allies as soon as
possible. (C)
Military Supply Relationship: General Graves has been in Yugoslavia
where he has had talks with Ljubicic and other Yugoslav officials (Tab
A). The main problem in the military supply relationship remains the
high cost of US weapons and the inability of the Yugoslav’s to pay for
them. Ljubicic made several proposals on how we might overcome the
financial obstacles (military credits to Yugoslavia and they would then
use them to pay for US hardware, etc.)6 Ask Harold to explore the
feasibility of Ljubicic’s proposals and report back as to how we can
overcome the financial obstacles.7 (S)
5 Brzezinski underlined “low profile and perfunctory” and wrote an illegible com-
ment in the margin.
6 Ljubicic made two proposals: 1) That the U.S. help Yugoslavia obtain commercial
credits that could be used for the purposes of buying military hardware if FMS credits
remained a challenge. 2) That the U.S. consider selling Yugoslavia small quantities of
some of the up-to-date anti-tank and air-defense systems for training purposes. Ljubicic
told Graves: “Yugoslavia recognizes that in exceptional situations—‘and we both under-
stand what such situations might be’—Yugoslavia may be able to obtain from the United
States the up-to-date weapons systems it needs to defend itself.” These weapons—which
the Embassy identified as the Viper, Stinger, and Roland missile systems—would be
used for training purposes in preparation for larger scale acquisition in a time of crisis.
Policy File, D800075–0640)
7 Brzezinski highlighted this sentence and wrote “Very important” in the margin.
At the bottom of the page he wrote: “We should immediately call Armstrong, Von
Staden, Wahl[erhime] to see what their people plan to do, & to set up a system for
coordinating our statements and the line our leaders [wi]ll take in meeting the Soviets,
that should include: * restore Afghanistan as a buffer; * token Soviet withdrawals and
new plans; * Will guarantee neutrality of non-aligned Afghanistan ([illegible] pro Sunni,
Islamic (eg Iraq)).

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
281.
Memorandum From the Deputy Executive Secretary of the
Department of State (Bremer) to Secretary of State Vance1
Washington, February 14, 1980
SUBJECT
Your Breakfast with the President Friday, February 15, 1980
1. Yugoslavia.
A. Current State of Play.
Tito’s condition remains “very grave,” according to the latest Yugo-
slav medical bulletin. While Tito could die at any moment, [less than
1 line not declassified] he could last another day or two.
A proposed public statement by the President and condolence
messages for the President and Vice President are at the White House.
You also will issue a brief statement and send a condolence message to
the Yugoslav Foreign Secretary. We will brief key members of Congress,
stressing our confidence in Yugoslavia’s ability to manage its own
affairs successfully during the coming months.
Although we have no indication as yet from the Yugoslavs, we
expect there will be a State funeral or memorial service approximately
six days after Tito’s death. Ambassador Eagleburger has been informed
by the U.K. in Belgrade that a “firm” decision has already been made
that Prince Phillip, Thatcher and Carrington will attend. We expect
heavy, high-level attendance by Third World, Western and at least
some Eastern leaders. Embassy Belgrade’s tentative list of participants
includes Presidents Ceausescu and Pertini, Schmidt, Genscher and
Brandt, and Clark of Canada.
A proposed funeral delegation list has been sent to the White House
by Ben Read’s office (Tab 1).2 Ambassador Eagleburger has asked us
to bear in mind, especially regarding accompanying staff, that there
will be a flood of delegations and that Belgrade is a small city with
severely limited hotel space. Briefing materials are being prepared for
use with the Yugoslavs and for anticipated bilaterals.
We can expect the Soviets to field a high-level delegation and will
inevitably have to deal with the question of a possible bilateral. We
would not expect much of substantive value from such a meeting and
Sensitive.
2 Attached but not printed.

Yugoslavia
would probably want to convey this view publicly. In the interest of
allied solidarity, however, we would not want to be seen as avoiding
a bilateral. A meeting would also give us a chance to express directly
to the Soviets our views on SALT, TNF and other issues which will
remain of mutual concern despite Afghanistan. A memo from Marshall
on the meeting is at Tab 2.3
B. Outlook for Post-Tito/Yugoslav Relations.
Bilateral relations have been strengthened significantly during the
past three years in all fields including political, economic and military.
Our problems are minor in comparison to what has been achieved.
On Tito’s death, we will want to demonstrate through actions and
public statements, our confidence in Yugoslavia’s new leadership and
in its ability to manage the country’s economy and its defense.
We will need to: continue intensified efforts to prevent anti-Yugo-
slav terrorism; encourage U.S. banks and businessmen to continue
business as usual; and see if we can be more forthcoming regarding
Yugoslav arms sales requests.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to Yugoslavia.]
3 In the attached February 14 memorandum to Vance, Marshall Shulman suggested
that the Soviet leadership was likely to: 1) send a top-level delegation to the funeral in
order to gain influence with the emerging Yugoslav leadership; 2) meet with Western
European leaders to weaken allied support for the U.S. position on Afghanistan; and
3) lobby non-aligned leaders in attendance. A bilateral meeting between the United
States and the Soviet Union, Shulman suggested, would be inevitable. While he had
little expectation of a breakthrough, such a meeting would, among other things, help
avoid miscalculations on the Soviet side by stressing U.S. Government positions with
regard to Yugoslavia, Cuba, etc.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
282.
Memorandum From Stephen Larrabee of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, February 14, 1980
SUBJECT
President’s Attendance at Tito’s Funeral
I understand that you feel that the President should not go to Tito’s
funeral. While I appreciate the difficulties his attendance might pose—
especially in regard to any meeting with Brezhnev—in my view the
primary consideration should not be how to handle a meeting with Brezhnev
(who may well not attend the funeral) but the type of signal the President’s
attendance—or failure to attend—would convey to the Soviets, to the Allies,
and above all to the Yugoslavs. From this perspective, there are strong
and compelling reasons why I believe the President should lead the
funeral delegation:
1. The Impact on the Yugoslavs. Despite the outward calm and all
the preparations for Tito’s death, the Yugoslavs still remain nervous
about what the future portends and suspicious of the depth and the
sincerity of U.S. support. As Ambassador Eagleburger has rightly
stressed, what we do in the first few days and weeks after Tito’s death
will have a major psychological and political impact on the Yugoslav
leadership and on future Yugoslav attitudes. Nothing would do more to
reassure the new leadership and underscore our support for Yugoslavia’s
independence and nonaligned position than for the President to go to the
funeral. His attendance would also be a clear signal to others, who
in the wake of Soviet invasion of Afghanistan are concerned about
Soviet intentions, that the U.S. is firmly committed to supporting
Yugoslavia. (C)
2. The Danger of Ambiguity. Conversely, if the President does not
go, and other major European leaders do (Thatcher already plans to
go, and it is almost certain that Schmidt and Giscard will go), it will
appear as if the U.S. is less concerned about Yugoslavia than are our
allies, and the credibility of our past statements of support will be
weakened. Many people will undoubtedly recall the President’s ambig-
uous campaign statement on Yugoslavia,2 and he will be criticized by
mation. A stamped notation on the memorandum reads: “ZB has seen.”
the Presidential debate with President Ford.

Yugoslavia
some of his opponents, as well as some journalists, for passing up an
important chance to concretely underscore U.S. support for Yugoslavia
at a critical moment. (C)
3. Consultation with the Allies. The trip provides a valuable opportu-
nity for the President to consult with the allies (especially Schmidt,
Thatcher and Giscard) and to coordinate policy on a broad range of
issues at a moment when allied solidarity is—or at least is perceived
to be—beginning to unravel. A meeting with the major allies could
serve to shore up this solidarity and give it a shot in the arm. But this
will require leadership that only the President can provide. In lieu of
that, as Bob Blackwill has pointed out, East-West detente will be left
in the hands of Schmidt and Giscard, who may succumb to attempts
by the Soviets to exploit fissures in the Alliance. (C)
4. Domestic Political Considerations. The trip could help the President
domestically. He would capture the headlines, be seen meeting with
world leaders and providing international leadership while the Vice
President campaigns in New Hampshire—and he could be back in the
White House in 48 hours. (C)
5. The Soviet Angle. Because of Brezhnev’s health, and with Kosygin
incapacitated, it is far from certain that he will attend the funeral. (The
Soviets only sent their Ambassador to Kardelj’s funeral—a point not
lost on the Yugoslavs.) If Brezhnev does not go—and my guess is that
he won’t—then there is no problem. Vance could meet quietly with
Gromyko or you could meet with Alexandrov.3 If Brezhnev does go,
then the President can hardly avoid meeting with him. While any such
meeting is unlikely to result in any dramatic change in Soviet policy
or a major improvement in bilateral relations, it need not turn into a
shouting match. At the very least it would provide an opportunity for
the President to:
—make clear to the Soviets at the highest level in a firm nonpolemi-
cal manner the nature of our concerns over Afghanistan and the reasons
for our actions;
—reaffirm his belief in the need to dampen military competition
and move forward in areas such as MBFR, SALT and CSCE;
—project an image of firmness and determination to defend vital
U.S. interest;
—keep open the lines of communication and leave the door ajar
for any Soviet initiatives at a later date. (C)
3 Andrei M. Aleksandrov-Agentov, a member of the Secretariat of the General
Secretary, Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, and Brezh-
nev’s foreign policy adviser.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
283.
Telegram From the Embassy in Yugoslavia to the
Department of State1
1248. Dept pls pass to OSD/ASD/ISA. Subj: Yugoslavia After Tito:
The Short Term.
1. (S-entire text).
2. This cable summarizes my views on the short-term prospects
(immediately following the death and for some 6 months thereafter)
for a smooth transition to the post-Tito era. A second cable will consider
the longer term.2
3. Outwardly the Yugoslavs, and their government, will remain
calm. There will be some military alert measures taken; the police will
increase surveillance of known or suspected internal opponents, and
may even take a few into custody; there will be a host of public state-
ments about Yugoslavia’s internal stability and its willingness and
capability to defend itself from external threat; the collective presidency
will ostentatiously take decisions; there will be a real effort to show
that business is going on “as usual.”
4. To a great degree the perceived picture will be the real one.
There will be no panic; the decision-making process will function
smoothly; the Croats will not rise up against the Serbs, or vice versa.
There will, in fact, be an extraordinary effort to compromise differences
(of which there are many) and to avoid any hint of controversy.
5. But the collective presidency will not be—even at this early
stage—a collegium of equals, all of whom have similar weight in the
making of decisions. The evidence during Tito’s earlier illness was
clear (even if the identity of all the players was not) that there will be
an inner group (drawn from the State and Party Presidencies) that will
decide most questions. Bakaric’s role can probably best be described
as chairman of the board. He will oversee the system and his colleagues,
Secret; Immediate; Limdis. Sent for information to Zagreb, Moscow, USCINCEUR, and
USNMRSHAPE.
of stability in Yugoslavia over the longer term. The conventional analysis on Yugoslavia,
Eagleburger wrote, ranged “from mild to extreme pessimism.” Disagreeing with that
interpretation, Eagleburger wrote that, over the next five years, “Yugoslavia will remain
stable, the collective leadership concept will work,” its foreign policy will “remain
committed to non-alignment,” and that “so long as the Soviet Union continues its current
policies, basic Yugoslav interests will be in conflict with those of Moscow, with little
chance for much more than a cosmetic accommodation.” (National Archives, RG 59,
Central Foreign Policy File, D800084–0050)

Yugoslavia
coordinate activities between agencies, and determine agendas. He will
not be Generalissimo, but he will be the ranking General. Milos Minic,
long-term Tito associate and former Foreign Secretary, will be in charge
of foreign policy; General Ljubicic, Defense Minister, will run national
defense and be involved in broader political decisions. The central role
that these three have played, and will play, is clear.
6. Other participants are less easily discernible. Prime Minister
Djuranovic is probably the key figure on all matters economic and, as
such, inevitably will be a part of—or on the edges of—the inner circle.
Kolisevski, the new but temporary Chief of State, and Doronski, Chair-
man of the Party Presidium (also only temporarily), will, because they
are where they are, carry some weight. But both are eminently dull
and forgettable fellows and will probably not survive as significant
factors after their terms expire. Dolanc and Mikulic are important fig-
ures now, and may become more so as time goes on. Dragosavac also
bears watching, both from the Croatian perspective and because he is
a leading “conservative” who could play an important role should
things turn sour.
7. But beneath the calm exterior there will lie a degree of uncertainty
and disquiet which will not soon or easily be put aside. First and
foremost will be overwhelming fact that the father figure, the man
above the battle who resolved disputes when no one else could, the
only true Yugoslav, is gone. For a while, until they are accustomed to
doing without him, the fact that Tito is no longer there to turn to
will be a massive if subliminal psychological problem for people and
government alike.
8. Then, of course, there is the Soviet threat, which is never far
from the mind of any Yugoslav. Relations with Moscow have been
bad and getting worse for the past two years, which adds to the disquiet.
And Afghanistan has hardly been a reassuring event.
9. How the Soviets play the first few weeks after Tito’s death
can make some difference. If Brezhnev comes to the funeral (assuming
he is up to it), and if he behaves himself, it will somewhat relieve
concerns. If, on the other hand, the Soviets treat Tito’s death as
they did Kardelj’s (they virtually ignored it), the level of nervousness
will skyrocket. But in any event, I am persuaded that Yugoslav and
Soviet interests are so widely divergent that no real relaxation over
the long term is likely. This is not to say that a less confident
Yugoslav leadership will deal as forcefully with Moscow as Tito
did. On the contrary, faced with problems at home and vulnerable
to Soviet economic pressures, the new leaders will probably—at least
in the short term—feel compelled to accommodate Soviet interests
to a greater degree than in the past (e.g., by adopting a lower profile
on issues such as Afghanistan).

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
10. And while the Yugoslavs ponder Soviets motives they will also
recognize that with Tito’s death their leadership role in NAM, already
sharply challenged by Castro as a Soviet surrogate, will be instantly
diminished. If they suffered any illusions before Afghanistan and while
Tito was still alive that NAM could be an effective bulwark against
Soviet pressures, they will soon have to conclude that this is no longer
so much the case.
11. And finally, Tito’s death comes at a time of substantial economic
disquiet which will not soon diminish. Terms of trade in 1979 were
worse than for many years and will not improve much this year; an
inflation rate of some 30 percent will not be brought to more acceptable
levels for sometime to come; and devolution to the republics of substan-
tial economic powers means that the central government probably
cannot move rapidly—and perhaps not effectively—to correct the dete-
rioration. Yet act it must, and soon, or 1980 will be even worse than
1979 and the eventual cure more painful. The government knows this;
the question is whether it will have the courage and clout to pursue
the corrective actions begun late last year and early in 1980. In fact,
the best early test of the post-Tito collective leadership will be how
effectively it moves to take stiff economic measures at a time of transi-
tion and possible external pressures.
12. In sum, there will be no collapse. The transition will be smooth
and with a minimum of turbulence. But there will be substantial if
hidden tension, and a lack of self-confidence that will diminish as and
if the government is able to cope. Those who govern will be sensitive,
nervous, and tough in the extreme—at least at first. They will know,
and they will be right, that how well they do in the first six months
after Tito’s death will have a substantial impact on the future viability
and permanence of the collective leadership concept.
13. In these circumstances the opportunities for the USG are enor-
mous. The Carter administration has spent some three years preparing
for this moment. Our political relations are at least as good as they
have ever been; our international differences, while still substantial,
have been greatly reduced, both in scope and decibel level; and we
have become an important and valued economic partner. If we act with
wisdom, understanding, and restraint over the course of the critical
next six months the pay-off for both our countries can be substantial.
What the Yugoslavs need now is reassurance that they do not stand
alone. They need to be shown that we, with the West following our
lead, stand ready to help where we can and take risks on their behalf
when we must.
14. Milovan Djilas believes that post-Tito Yugoslavia will, inevita-
bly, reshape its political and economic institutions in ways we in the
West will find appealing. I share the hope, but am less confident of

Yugoslavia
the inevitability. Yet the odds favor liberalization; what we and our
Western Allies do, beginning now, will have a great deal to do with
whether that present hope can be turned into future reality.
Eagleburger
284.
Paper Prepared in the Department of State1
Washington, March 3, 1980
Yugoslavia: US Politico-Military Strategy
Executive Summary
This paper examines four major post-Tito scenarios in Yugoslavia,
and Soviet policies for each. It then sets forth the politico-military steps
the US should take over the near term to prepare for these scenarios,
and the policies we should pursue when one or more of them develops.
The issue of direct US military action in Yugoslavia in response to
steps the Soviets might take is beyond the scope of this paper.
The US and NATO have important interests in a stable, independ-
ent, and nonaligned Yugoslavia. Were it allied or more cooperative
with the Warsaw Pact, Yugoslavia could support expanded Soviet
naval and air operations in the Mediterranean. The occupation of Yugo-
slavia by Warsaw Pact forces would present a threat to Greece, Italy,
and Austria. In addition, a Soviet takeover of Yugoslavia would deal
a profound psychological blow to NATO.
At the same time, Yugoslavia remains a communist state, albeit
nonaligned with extensive but still limited ties to the West. The US
and its NATO Allies have no military commitment to Yugoslavia’s
security. The Yugoslavs now expect to rely mainly on their own
resources to blunt any Soviet attack, but they would want some Western
support, e.g., logistic. In the face of an actual attack, they might change
Nodis. Sent under a March 6 covering memorandum from Tarnoff to Brzezinski. Tarnoff
explained the paper was “developed by an interagency group chaired by State. A mini-
SCC on January 18, 1980, requested such a study. We recommend that another mini-
SCC be held to consider the post-Tito security framework and scenarios which the paper
sets forth and the adequacy of present policies in the politico-military field to prepare
for them.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
their present expectation and request more direct Western military
engagement.
This paper sets forth a number of policy areas for US action. Perhaps
the most important at this time is to strengthen the US military supply
relationship with Yugoslavia. In recent years it has been limited. The
Yugoslavs strongly complain that prices of US equipment are too high,
and they are extremely wary of publicity. Nevertheless, there are pros-
pects for sales of some systems the Yugoslavs want, such as air defense
radars. Even though the Yugoslavs have not bought much from the
US, they remain seriously interested in developing the arms transfer
relationship.
Post-Tito Scenarios
In the initial post-Tito period Yugoslavia is likely to remain united
and the Soviets to exercise a certain caution. The scenarios set forth
below address the situations we could face over the mid-to-longer
term. These scenarios are illustrative.
Scenario 1: Cohesion: Yugoslav leadership demonstrates unity and
basic consensus, achieves broad popular support, continues nonalign-
ment. The Soviets might attempt to both woo and pressure the Yugoslav
leadership, presenting it with an ambiguous, but not openly threatening
Soviet stance. If the Soviets were willing to pursue riskier policies, they
could seek to weaken the new leadership and to generate ethnic and
regional tensions.
Scenario 2: Cohesion with Liberalization and/or Westward Shift: Internal
cohesion as in Scenario 1, but accompanied by political liberalization
or a decided shift westward in Yugoslav foreign policy. The Soviets
would intensify pressures on Yugoslavia to eschew such trends.
Depending on how pronounced were the trends, the Soviets might
even use military pressure. But the greater the cohesiveness in Yugo-
slavia, the less likely the Soviets would intervene with force.
Scenario 3: Disunity: Early post-Tito unity and consensus of federal
leadership begins to break down as regional disputes and pressures
on leadership mount. If disunity were limited, the Soviets would urge
decisive recentralization steps. If the situation deteriorated further,
regional constituencies could seek active Soviet backing. There would
be an active prospect of Soviet military intervention. Soviet perceptions
of potential Western responses would be critical.
Scenario 4: Soviet Military Intervention: If the USSR saw disunity in
Yugoslavia as very serious, it might decide to intervene militarily. Were
Yugoslavia’s armed forces cohesive and strong, the USSR might need
to assemble 40–50 divisions to launch a full-scale assault. Alternatively,
if Yugoslavia were weakened by internal conflict, the Soviets might
decide to use a smaller force, perhaps 20–25 divisions. The USSR would

Yugoslavia
worry about NATO or Chinese counteractions on other fronts. While
at present there is no evidence of Soviet intention to intervene in Yugo-
slavia, Soviet actions must be viewed as uncertain and changeable, and
dependent on Yugoslav military and political strength as well as on
opportunities presented and commitments elsewhere.
Strategy
Over the near term the US can take steps to reassure the Yugoslavs
and to keep the Soviets on the defensive. As post-Tito scenarios emerge,
the US can take additional steps, as necessary and generally after con-
sultations with the Yugoslavs and our key allies (recognizing Yugoslav
sensitivity to NATO actions). The politico-military measures suggested
below would complement economic and other political instruments of
US diplomacy.
Decision Point 1: Near Term Objective: indicate a high level of politi-
cal interest in Yugoslavia’s independence and unity, and continue to
strengthen Yugoslav political and military ties with the US and the
West, through small and nonprovocative, but cumulatively important
steps. US actions could include:
—at the time of Tito’s death, US and allied statements of support
for Yugoslavia,
—visits by Secretary Vance and top military officials,
—intensified consultations with key allies,
—implementation of more forthcoming US arms sales policy, and
expanded IMET,
—possibly intelligence cooperation on terrorism.
Decision Point 2: Cohesion (Post-Tito Scenario 1) Objective: continue
to demonstrate a high level of political interest. If the Soviets pursued
divisive tactics, the US should take a tougher stance toward USSR. If
the Yugoslavs showed signs of succumbing to Soviet pressures (e.g., for
greater naval or overflight rights), the US should make countervailing
efforts to reassure and dissuade the Yugoslavs. Specific US policies to
counter divisive Soviet tactics might include:
—warnings to the USSR, and encouragement of allies and others
to do the same,
—provision to Yugoslavs of information on Warsaw Pact mili-
tary activities,
—if necessary to signal the USSR, carry out selected US and allied
force redeployments, exercises, or augmentations.
Decision Point 3: Cohesion with Liberalization and/or Westward Shift
(Post-Tito Scenario 2) Objective: measured political support for Yugo-
slavs (complementing economic steps, such as strengthening EC ties).
Our policies would remain those at Decision Point 2, intensified as
necessary. We could face difficult choices if events in Yugoslavia moved
too fast.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
Decision Point 4: Disunity (Post-Tito Scenario 3) Objective: support
policies that help the new leadership rebuild consensus and national
unity, and resist Soviet intimidation and subversion. Specifically, the
US could provide [less than 1 line not declassified] specialized equipment
needed by the government. If the Soviets aggressively exploited the
situation, the US and European allies could escalate responses, by:
—making tougher warnings to the USSR,
—expanding force redeployment, augmentation, and exercise
measures (e.g., involving the Sixth fleet, land-based tactical air power,
AWACS, the ACE Mobile Force, the NATO Naval On-Call Force
Mediterranean),
—raising the general alert status or increasing the deployability of
US/NATO forces,
—providing US and allied logistics support packages for quick
upgrading of Yugoslav defense capabilities,2
—taking measures to guarantee and protect the air, sea and land
lines of communication to Yugoslavia, and to ensure enroute access.
These steps should be undertaken in ways that show resolve, yet
avoid an all-out confrontation with the Soviets or the impression that
the West is seeking base rights in Yugoslavia.
Decision Point 5: Soviet Military Intervention (Post-Tito Scenario 4)
Objective: support Yugoslav resistance to Soviet aggression, in ways
consistent with Yugoslav desires, with our larger security interests in
NATO’s Southern Region and in Europe generally, and with US mili-
tary posture and requirements worldwide. The US could:
—augment measures listed at Decision Point 4,
—with allied cooperation, undertake airlift of arms and equipment
to Yugoslav forces in secure areas,
—if necessary, undertake a partial mobilization of US reserve
forces, and other steps to enhance US and allied force readiness,
—institute stronger measures, if necessary, to protect air and sea
lines of communication to Yugoslavia.
[Omitted here is the body of the paper.]
2 Following consultations with the Allies in the Quadripartite Military Group, Janu-
ary 25, 1980, General Bowen drew up a list of equipment NATO could offer the Yugoslav
military in case of low-, mid-, and high-level crises. (Carter Library, National Security
Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Country Chron File, Box 57, Yugo-

Yugoslavia
285.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
Yugoslavia1
65034. Military addees handle as Specat Exclusive. Subject: Steps
the USG Could Take in Support of Post-Tito Yugoslavia Military
Relations. (S) Ref: Belgrade 1264.2 From Nimetz for Eagleburger.
1. Secret (entire text)
2. Since the receipt of reftel we have been engaged in extensive
interagency consideration of your thought provoking ideas. We have
a preliminary consensus on a number of your proposals. You may
draw on the following in talking to Gen. Ljubicic and other Yugoslav
officials.
A. Weapon system “samples”; we are prepared to provide the GOY
LOA’s for small amounts of missiles (50 each) and a single set of related
ground equipment of TOW and Dragon. In addition, we now are
willing to provide LOA’s for 50 Redeye air defense missiles and related
equipment. These are systems we currently can actually draw on to
support Yugoslavia in a crisis. We are also examining other defense
items which might interest the GOY for this type program. We need
more details about Yugoslav ideas on this approach, e.g., quantities of
missiles, when they would wish to begin etc. In order to explore this
further we propose sending an Army team to Belgrade at an early date
to discuss Yugoslav requirements with the aim of developing effective
training packages for these systems, developing specific components
of support packages to be included with missiles, and determining
Secret; Priority; Exdis. Drafted by Pfeifle (PM/SAS); cleared by Barry (EUR), Farber
(PM/SAS) and McGiffert (DOD) and in ACDA, T, D/CT, and M; approved by Nimetz.
Sent for information to the Secretary of Defense.
dations concerning military cooperation with Yugoslavia following Tito’s death: 1) strong
consideration of the “sample sales” of advanced weapons systems to Yugoslavia for
training purposes; 2) an expansion of the IMET program to include Yugoslavia; and 3)
the possibility of selling weapons systems in Yugoslav dinars rather than U.S. dollars.
revised the IMET proposal in telegram 1274 from Belgrade, February 18. (National

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
delivery times.3 These issues, to include availability and condition of
support equipment need to be addressed prior to proceeding beyond
this conceptual agreement. Items of support equipment must be identi-
fied and screened, resulting in uncertainties at this time in requirements
for calibration and repair, and delivery dates.
B. Since Stinger is only now entering the U.S. inventory and Viper
and other systems are not yet in production, it is premature to consider
transfer of these systems. We will give Yugoslav requests for samples
priority attention as soon as it becomes possible to consider transfer
of these systems.
C. With regard to Roland, since Yugoslavia is in the Franco-German
sales territory, the GOY should discuss such purchases with the French
and Germans. We have broached the subject of Roland for Yugoslavia
to the French and believe it possible that a sale of limited numbers
would be approved. Obviously, we will support such a Yugoslav
approach.4
3. We will find an additional $30,000 in IMET funds and can make
room at Leavenworth, Maxwell, Newport or certain other schools
(excluding the US Army War College) if the Yugoslavs are interested
in expanded attendance either in FY 80 or 1981. In previous informal
discussions on this subject the Yugoslavs have cited problems with
making available the right kind of officer and completing his English
language training. If the Yugoslavs desire courses in FY 80, we would
have to take reprogramming action soon including congressional notifi-
3 Siena met with Yugoslav officials on January 10 to discuss the U.S.-Yugoslav
military supply relationship in preparation for Graves’s visit. In a January 19 memoran-
dum, he reported that the Yugoslav Government attached primary importance to receiv-
ing information on the availability of the Viper, Stinger, and Harpoon weapons systems.
Siena recommended that the Department of Defense complete a study on the availability
of weapons systems previously denied the Yugoslavs. (Carter Library, National Security
Affairs, Staff Material, Europe, USSR, and East/West, Larrabee Subject File, Box 68,
Yugoslav Government would welcome an Army team to Yugoslavia to discuss Yugoslav
to Brzezinski. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Europe, USSR,
4 In a March 28 memorandum, Larrabee informed Brzezinski and Aaron of Bow-
man’s discussions within the Four Powers group with respect to supplying weapons to
Yugoslavia. While some weapons systems were considered too sensitive to provide to
Yugoslavia, the Quad agreed to provide some of the systems Belgrade requested while
more advance systems could be provided at a later date. Regarding the bilateral U.S.-
Yugoslav military cooperation, Larrabee wrote that Defense was prepared to offer the
Yugoslav Government small numbers of more advanced systems for training purposes.
(Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File,

Yugoslavia
cation.5 This might attract limited public attention, but we do not
believe it will be at all controversial.
4. Unfortunately we cannot sell military equipment for local cur-
rency—we will explore other ideas to provide useful materiel at lower
prices, but cannot hold out much hope at this point.
5. Drawing on the above, please tell Gen. Ljubicic that:
—We are intrigued with his idea of training “samples” of weapon
systems and are prepared to send an Army team to Belgrade with the
aim of working out a mutually acceptable program.
—We now are prepared to include Redeye air defense missiles in
addition to TOW and Dragon in such a training program.
—We have informally discussed with the French the possibility of
the sale of Roland to Yugoslavia and would support such a sale.
—We will provide additional funds for tuition of Yugoslav officers
at selected Service schools if the Yugoslavs are interested.
6. Defense concurs.
Vance
request for two IMET slots for the 1980 Command and General Staff College class at

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
286.
Telegram From the Embassy in Yugoslavia to the
Department of State1
2514. Military addressees handle as Specat Exclusive. For Under
Secretary Nimetz. Please pass DOD/ISA McGiffert and CNO. Subject:
Military Relationship With Yugoslavia. Refs: A) Belgrade 2473,2 B)
1. S-entire text
2. We appear to be on the verge of a major breakthrough in our
military cooperation with the Yugoslavs. We need to grab hold of the
moment, because if we let it slip through our fingers this time it is not
likely to come soon again.
3. Refs A and B report Yugoslav requests for the sale of MK–46
torpedos and the Harpoon missile system. Ref C indicates that we may
soon receive a request for the sale of 6 F5E/F aircraft. And, we today
signed an LOA for some 27 million dols worth of AN/TPS–63 radars.
In short, we seem to have overcome the Dragon missile setback; the
Yugoslav military has, clearly at the highest levels, decided to move—
and in some highly visible areas—in our direction.
4. It is, I believe, absolutely essential that we react positively (and
hopefully quickly) to the MK–46 and Harpoon requests, and to the
F5E/F request should it be forthcoming. The GOY, and particularly
General Ljubicic, will be a lost cause if we now say no on either the
MK–46 or the F5E/F. Honesty compels me to admit, however, that a
Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Sent for information to USCINCEUR. Larrabee and Kimmitt
forwarded the telegram to Brzezinski under a March 31 memorandum, and recom-
mended that a mini-SCC be held to discuss the sale of weapons systems to Yugoslavia.
(Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Europe, USSR, and East/West,
approved the sale of MK–46 and F–5E, and instructed that the sale of the Harpoon
missile not be denied outright. He also noted that Congress would have to be informed.
(Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Europe, USSR, and East/West,
2 Not found.
3 Not found.
4 Not found.
in Belgrade that, in light of the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, the U.S. Government
had decided to “adopt a more forthcoming policy of approving sales to Yugoslavia.”
The telegram instructed Eagleburger to inform Vrhovec that “this means the USG will
be prepared to release more sophisticated weapons systems to Yugoslavia on a case by
case basis should the extent and character of the military requirement warrant.” (National

Yugoslavia
no on the Harpoon, while it will not sit well, will probably not repeat
not have the adverse impact that a rejection in either of the other
two cases would entail particularly in light of ref D. Conversely, an
affirmative reply on the Harpoon would be a major statement of our
support at a time when such signals will have a substantial and lasting
impact on the attitudes and outlook of people of critical importance
to us in the years ahead.
5. My earlier experience in the Pentagon leads me to believe that
the Navy, for understandable and respectable reasons, will probably
question the wisdom of release of either the MK–46 or Harpoon to the
Yugoslavs. Unless I miss my guess, they will put forth at least two
arguments: A) there can be no guarantee that Yugoslavia will not
transfer to the Soviets, or permit them to examine, the weapons systems
in question; B) Yugoslavia, as a potential opponent, should not be sold
weapons systems that could be used against US forces.
6. These are perfectly legitimate concerns for which there is no
completely satisfactory response. As in everything having to do with
foreign policy, the balance of pros and cons must be struck in individual
cases. The arguments in response to the straw horse I may have created
in para 5 are, as I see them, basically three: they are, admittedly,
judgmental in character. The first, the political advantage to the US—
particularly at a time when Tito is on his deathbed—has been made
by me so many times in so many ways that I will not (you will be
relieved to learn) burden you with a repetition here. Suffice it to say
that on political grounds alone I believe the USG would be well advised
to approve release of both the MK–46 and Harpoon to Yugoslavia.
7. As to the question of transfer of the technology, all I can say is
that we have no evidence that such has been the case before, nor is
there any reason to believe that it would happen now, when Yugoslav-
Soviet relations are at a nadir, or in the future. All the evidence we
have indicates that the GOY is meticulous in refusing to discuss with
any third party its military relationship—much less the intimate details
of the weapons involved—with any arms supplier. We have been held
at arms length when we have tried to talk about Yugoslav purchases
from the USSR or others, and understand that others have encountered
a similar attitude. Thus, in my judgment (a judgment fully concurred
in by the DATT), an argument that the Yugoslavs might transfer the
technology is, at best, a worst case judgment supported by no evidence
or experience to date.
8. So far as the question of Yugoslavia as a potential enemy is
concerned, I find it hard to envisage a situation in which this would
be a likely event. But, again, using a worst case analysis, it would seem
to me that any war in which the Yugoslavs would be engaged against
us would be one of such magnitude that the Yugoslav contribution

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
would be negligible at best. What seems far more likely is that the
Yugoslavs, who have always contended that, if attacked by the Soviets,
they will do all they can to drag the West into the struggle, see both
the MK–46 and the Harpoon as means for keeping the Adriatic open
as a highway for resupply and perhaps reenforcement from the West.
While we may not much enjoy contemplating the course of conduct
for ourselves that such thinking would imply, we can hardly take issue
with the rationale or point of view behind it.
9. One further word on what may be going on in Yugoslav minds
right now that has led to the rather startling turn in our direction.
As Washington knows, Yugoslav-Soviet relations have been getting
steadily worse, especially since the Afghan invasion. The Yugoslavs
have been surprisingly open in their condemnation of the Soviets,
and in their efforts to lead the Non-Aligned to condemn the Soviet
aggression. The Soviets have reacted, as one might expect. But the
reaction has been surprisingly harsh, and getting more so. While this
is not the place to attempt an analysis of the reasons for the Soviet
reaction, it is difficult to escape the conclusion that it is, at least in part,
an attempt to cow the post-Tito leadership ab initio, in the belief that
over the long haul Moscow will gain more by applying the baseball
bat at a time of uncertainty and fear in Belgrade than by a display of
patience and forebearance. Equally, we might assume that the GOY,
from fear or a desire to show Moscow it cannot be pushed around (or
both), has decided to strengthen its military cooperation with the US,
knowing that the Soviets will learn of the move. If this is the case, then
we have a great deal to lose—and not just in the military sphere—by
actions on our part that imply to the new Yugoslav leadership that it
had better accommodate while it can because the West is unprepared
to offer much more than tea and sympathy.6
10. There is a term (which I have now forgotten) in the science of
logic for the process of setting up false arguments so that by knocking
them down you support your own case. I may have engaged in that
practice in this cable. But the facts are nonetheless clear:
—Tito is dying, and Yugoslavia is already moving into the post-
Tito period;
—Yugoslav-Soviet relations are in a worse state than at any time
since Tito more-or-less patched up his quarrel with Moscow in 1955;
—The GOY has turned to the US for military support on a scale
not seen since the closing out of our MAP in the 1950’s.
6 On his copy, Brzezinski highlighted this sentence and wrote in the margin “this
is a key p[oin]t.”

Yugoslavia
11. Watersheds are seldom recognized as such at the time. But we
may be in the middle of one so far as US-Yugoslav relations are con-
cerned. It would behoove us, therefore, to act with a little imagination,
since the payoff could be substantial. And since the Iranians already
have both the MK–46 and Harpoon in their inventory, what do we
really have to lose?
Eagleburger
287.
Memorandum From Stephen Larrabee of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Assistant
for National Security Affairs (Aaron)1
Washington, April 3, 1980
SUBJECT
Military Sales to Yugoslavia (C)
In preparation for a mini-SCC I met with Barry and Siena to discuss
where we stand on release of the items in the Kimmitt/Larrabee memo
of March 31, (Tab A).2 Siena reiterated what Kimmitt and I had noted
in our memo: that we will need to notify Congress of any sales of the
MK–46, HARPOON, and AN/TPS–63 radars. Current thinking in DOD
is to treat each item individually and make a request for an exception
through the National Disclosure Policy Committee (NDPC) channel—
a process that could take several weeks. (S)
Siena predicted that there will be opposition from the Navy on the
sale of the MK–46 and HARPOON, though he thought the opposition
to the MK–46 could probably be overcome. However, because of the
danger of leaks he felt it very important that we go though the NDPC
channel and not run roughshod over the Navy. If we attempted to
circumvent the NDPC process, he felt sure there would be a leak, which
would be extremely damaging to our military relationship with the
Yugoslavs. He recommended postponing any mini-SCC until both the
MK–46 and HARPOON had been discussed in the NDPC channel. Bob
Barry concurred. (S)
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
At the same time the group agreed that we should try to accelerate
the release of the AN/TPS–63 radars. The problem is that the Yugoslavs
have requested a custom-made radar, and the manufacture of such a
radar takes time. However, Siena is looking into the possibility of
arranging for the leasing of a similar radar on a stop-gap basis. (S)
We are also going back to Larry to get his views on whether a
delay of several weeks will create problems with the Yugoslavs.3 (C)
In light of the fact that moving through the NDPC channel may
take couple of weeks, there are two options:
1. Hold a mini-SCC only on State’s political-military paper.
2. Postpone the mini-SCC until the request for an exception for the
HARPOON and MK–46 has gone through the NDPC channel and we
have a clearer view of the attitude of the services. (S)
Under the circumstances I think it would be better to hold a mini-
SCC on State’s Political-Military paper, and then hold a second mini-
SCC on the bilateral/QUAD issues after the NDPC has had a chance
to meet. In the meantime Kimmitt and I will have Komer, who has
jurisdiction over the NDPC process, push the process as much as possi-
ble, and have Siena do what he can to accelerate release of the AN/
TPS–63 radars. (S)
RECOMMENDATION: That we hold a mini-SCC on State’s paper
only early next week and a second mini-SCC after the NDPC has met.
Kimmitt and Brement concur.
_____ Mini-SCC on State Paper only.
_____ Mini-SCC on Bilateral/QUAD issues and State paper after
NDPC process has been concluded.4
3 On April 2, the Department informed the Embassy that the Department of Defense
was not interested in holding an SCC meeting until the MK–46 and Harpoon issues had
that the two systems were being considered through the National Disclosure Policy
Central Foreign Policy File, D800187–0739)
4 Dodson wrote on the memorandum: “David—Let’s wait; do them together. Save
yourself a meeting.” Aaron approved the second option. Dodson noted on the document:
“OK to do together but push for fast resolution. Per DA”

Yugoslavia
288.
Memorandum From Acting Secretary of State Christopher to
Vice President Mondale1
Washington, undated
SUBJECT
Your Participation in the State Funeral of President Tito
I. OBJECTIVES
Your presence in Yugoslavia as the head of an impressive U.S.
delegation to Tito’s funeral2 is an important symbol for the Yugoslavs—
and for the Soviets. While your visit will be short, there will be both
private and public opportunity to reaffirm our policy of support for
Yugoslav independence, territorial integrity and unity—simple words,
but full of meaning in the context of the present world situation.
In brief meetings with the new Yugoslav leadership, you will want
to emphasize our confidence in their ability to run Yugoslav affairs
along the lines set down by Tito. They will appreciate concrete expres-
sions of our desire to strengthen the bilateral relationship by being
responsive to their needs, especially in the economic and military
spheres of our cooperation.
The Yugoslav leaders will also make clear to you their view of
nonaligned Yugoslavia’s unique international position. They will favor
the continued development of closer relations with the West—includ-
ing the U.S.—but they will also caution against ties which are too close
or too visible.
The Yugoslavs also want to avoid opening themselves to charges
from opponents within the Nonaligned Movement that they have com-
promised their nonaligned credentials by getting too close to the
Americans.
We expect the question of anti-Yugoslav Government emigre activ-
ity to be high on the Yugoslav agenda of items to bring up with
Western leaders—especially the Americans, Germans, Canadians and
Australians.
II. SETTING
The Internal Situation
The actual succession process has followed the pattern which Tito
had cut for it. The former Vice President, Lazar Kolisevski, a Macedo-
Secretary following the resignation of Secretary Vance on April 28.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
nian, has become the President of the collective State Presidency. On
May 15, Kolisevski is to rotate out of office and be replaced by another
member of the Presidency, Cvijetin Mijatovic, a Serb from Bosnia-
Hercegovina, for a one-year term.
With Tito’s death, his title of President of the Presidium of the
League of Communists of Yugoslavia (LCY) will be subsumed within
the Presidium as a whole. Thus the current Chairman of the Presidium,
Stevan Doronjski, a Serb from the Vojvodina, will become the head of
the Party until his rotation out of office when his one year term ends
in October, 1980. There is no established procedure for the rotation
process in the LCY Presidium and we do not know who will replace
Doronjski.
We anticipate that the succession process will operate smoothly,
and that the collective State and Party governing bodies will function
as planned—at least during the first few months after Tito’s death.
Political activity during Tito’s lengthy illness indicated that the senior
members of the Party, including Vladimir Bakaric, a Croat, Milos Minic,
a Serb, and a few others, intend to play an active political role in
conjunction with the operation of the collective organs of leadership.
How this will work in practice remains to be seen. We believe that the
military, in the person of Defense Secretary Ljubicic, will represent a
stabilizing factor on the national scene.
In the first few months of this year, Yugoslavia passed through a
period of near crisis, occasioned by the most serious illness President
Tito had ever suffered. His extended illness coincided with severe
domestic economic difficulties and the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan.
Any one of these factors would have posed serious problems for the
Yugoslav leadership. Their unfortunate coincidence compounded the
problem and presented the Yugoslav leaders—this time effectively
minus Tito—with a situation without precedent.
Tito’s comrades did very well indeed.3 To assert that these few
months provided a definitive test of the succession machinery of the
post-Tito leadership would be an exaggeration. The time was too short
3 In a May 6 memorandum to the Vice President, Eagleburger provided his own
analysis of the transition from Tito to the collective leadership. “By and large the system
has functioned smoothly,” Eagleburger wrote, adding that the new leadership under-
stands that “how well they do in the first six months will have a substantial impact on
the future viability of the system.” Because of that fact, Eagleburger wrote, “decision-
making will proceed in a fairly orderly fashion” and that “there will, in fact, be an
extraordinary effort to compromise differences and to avoid even a hint of personal rivalry
or controversy.” (National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Lawrence S.
Eagleburger, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, Ambassador to Yugoslavia,
May, 1980)

Yugoslavia
for more than a “start-up” run, yet too long for the development of
completely natural relations among Tito’s successors. But this did not
diminish the sense of deserved pride and increased self-confidence
which prevailed in Yugoslavia during this period. This is the principal
lesson to be learned from the events of the past few months: a successful
precedent now exists which will give the post-Tito leaders greater
confidence in the weeks and months ahead.
The Economy
Tito’s successors have inherited a seriously overheated economy.
The rapid economic growth over the past three years has pushed the
inflation rate over twenty percent, created a series of huge trade deficits,
and driven up hard currency debt to over $13 billion. The Yugoslavs
are now trying to implement a stabilization policy to tighten credit,
slow growth, and cut imports. However, these measures are politically
sensitive and will take time to have a real impact. To ease the economy
over this period, the Yugoslavs have requested medium term balance
of payments assistance from the U.S.4 and several other countries,
including France, the FRG, and Kuwait. They also intend to approach
the IMF and private Western banks which already hold much of the
country’s external debt.5 We believe that Yugoslavia’s economic prob-
lems are serious but that a real crisis can still be avoided through
prudent Yugoslav policies and some external financial help. We are
now considering what role the U.S. can play.6
4 On April 24, Kostic met Secretary of the Treasury Robert Miller in Hamburg, West
Germany, during the IMF summit and requested financial assistance for Yugoslavia’s
balance of payments deficit. Kostic told Miller that Yugoslavia was implementing an
economic stabilization program but that further borrowing was required. (Telegram
5 David Rockefeller, President of Chase Manhattan Bank, traveled to Belgrade in
June to discuss an offer to syndicate a worldwide $500 million loan for the Yugoslav
Government. Belgrade rejected the offer as insufficient. (Telegram 165468 to the U.S.
delegation in Venice, June 23; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
Yugoslav Government was opposed to a worldwide loan syndication and that Belgrade
was hoping to get separate loan agreements from several Western countries. Loncar also
stressed that Belgrade was reticent to accept loans from Arab countries because of
“political strings attached.” (Telegram 5192 from Belgrade, July 1; National Archives,
accepted by the Yugoslav Government in September. (Telegram 7051 from Belgrade,
6 Miller traveled to Belgrade as part of the U.S. delegation to Tito’s funeral and
discussed with Kostic the way in which the U.S. Government could offer assistance.
Miller stressed that the IMF must be involved in any stabilization program the Yugoslav
Government undertook. (Telegram 3749 from Belgrade, May 12; National Archives, RG

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
Foreign Affairs
While there is no evidence of any Soviet intention to move against
Yugoslavia at this time, the Yugoslav defense forces have prepared
themselves to defend the country against any threat.
In talks in Belgrade in early February with U.S. Defense Security
Assistance Agency Chief, General Graves, Defense Secretary Ljubicic
noted the contingency measures which had been taken “for all eventual-
ities,” but also noted that Yugoslavia was calm and not excited about
the current situation.7 (Our military relationship with the Yugoslavs
is modest, but growing.)
The Yugoslavs have been typically outspoken in their opposition
to Moscow’s move against Afghanistan and they have played a signifi-
cant role in the mobilization of nonaligned sentiment in condemnation
of the Soviet intervention. Previously, they had been almost equally
concerned at what they saw as Moscow’s war by proxy in Kampuchea.
A resultant exchange of open polemics in the Soviet and Yugoslav
press has served to exacerbate further Soviet-Yugoslav relations.8 In
addition, while Moscow was probably not surprised at the Yugoslav
refusal to attend the April 28–29 meeting in Paris of European Commu-
nist parties, neither was it pleased by the Yugoslav decision.
The U.S. is in a very good position with the new Yugoslav leaders.
We have—particularly during this Administration—accelerated the
pace of our bilateral relations in all key fields: political, economic,
cultural and military. The resultant “web of relationships,” as Ambassa-
dor Eagleburger describes it, has helped to increase our knowledge of
Yugoslav leadership attitudes as well as to increase Yugoslav confi-
dence in the durability of our friendship and our support. Tito’s visit
to the United States in March, 1978, contributed to this process and
the President’s frequent correspondence with Tito was of great benefit
in keeping up the momentum of improving relations.
Yugoslav Ambassador Loncar expressed his Government’s appre-
ciation for the President’s May 4 statement in which the President
of the Yugoslav press to publication in the Soviet press of commentaries on an article
published in a Vietnamese newspaper which the Yugoslav Government considered
highly offensive. The Embassy reported that “this is the sharpest criticism of the Soviet
press we can recall for several years.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
that the Yugoslav Government saw “a concerted Soviet campaign against Yugoslavia”
and felt the Soviet campaign was “not directed toward Yugoslavia’s internal situation
so much as toward Yugoslavia’s public opposition to Soviet moves in Afghanistan and
its influence in the NAM.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,

Yugoslavia
strongly reaffirmed U.S. support for Yugoslavia and stated that we
will do what we must to provide that support.9 The Ambassador also
expressed appreciation for a public statement by Deputy Assistant
Secretary Barry on April 22 pointing out that the U.S. would view
with grave concern any Soviet or Warsaw pact efforts to undermine
Yugoslav territorial integrity, unity and independence.10 The Soviets
attacked Barry’s statement as an effort to cast doubt on Soviet policies.
Yugoslav relations with the countries of Western Europe have also
improved during the past few years. In the present situation we have
urged the Western European governments to demonstrate their support
for Yugoslavia at this time by appropriate policy statements, by greater
attention to anti-Yugoslav emigre activity, by economic measures
including successful conclusion of the Yugoslav-EC trade agreement,
and by meeting Yugoslav requests for arms sales.
Yugoslavia’s increasing distrust of Soviet motives over the last year
reflected Tito’s personal disenchantment with Moscow. His successors
may well tread a more cautious line, attempting initially to take a
more “balanced” position. Such a shift would be designed to bolster
Yugoslavia’s credentials among the nonaligned and to reflect Yugoslav
concerns about growing East-West tensions. However, we suspect that
a more “evenhanded” approach would be largely tactical. The Yugoslav
people and leaders see a real threat in the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan
and Soviet support for the Vietnamese invasion of Kampuchea.11
The flagrant nature of Moscow’s intervention in Afghanistan may
have eased the pressures on Yugoslavia within the Nonaligned Move-
ment, however. The 1979 Havana Nonaligned Summit turned out to
be a stand off between the radicals led by Cubans and the moderates
9 On May 4, in a statement on the death of Tito, Carter noted that “for more than
three decades, under administrations of both parties, it has been the policy of the United
States to support the independence, territorial integrity, and unity of Yugoslavia.” Noting
the international situation, Carter stated: “America will continue its longstanding policy
of support for Yugoslavia and do what it must to provide that support.” (Public Papers:
statement in front of the Cleveland Council on World Affairs received no media attention
in the United States, but was immediately attacked by the Soviet press. In telegram 6702
from Moscow, April 25, the Embassy reported that the Soviet press described Barry’s
statements as “‘slandering’ Soviet policy” and “barely stopping short of threatening the
11 In the briefing material prepared for Mondale’s trip to Belgrade, the Department
noted that the “Yugoslav leaders perceive Soviet foreign policies—e.g., support of the
Vietnamese invasion of Kampuchea, opposition to an improvement in Yugoslav-Chinese
relations, manipulation of the Yugoslav-Bulgarian dispute over Macedonia, and attempts
to gain greater influence and control over the international communist and nonaligned
movements—as part of a ‘grand design’ threatening Yugoslavia’s vital interests.” (Carter
Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 87, Yugoslavia:
Briefing Book for Tito Funeral, 5/80)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
led by the Yugoslavs. But one of the first casualties in the Afghan war
was Cuba. Having survived a record number of votes in its effort to
gain a seat on the United Nations Security Council, Cuba withdrew
from the race immediately after the Soviet invasion.
Nonalignment has been the Yugoslav vehicle for the achievement
of international recognition and status.12 While nonalignment will con-
tinue to be the pillar of Yugoslav foreign policy, the Yugoslav role in
the Nonaligned Movement will almost certainly diminish without the
charismatic presence of Tito, one of the founders of the Movement.
III. ISSUES
A. U.S. Policy Toward Yugoslavia
1. Suggested Points
—Much progress was made in the development of our bilateral
relations during the past three years. President Tito’s tremendous con-
tribution to this mutual undertaking will be sorely missed. The Presi-
dent will particularly miss the correspondence which he and Tito
exchanged on international issues. We intend to redouble our efforts
to further strengthen our relations, and we are confident that these
efforts will be reciprocated by the Yugoslav side;
—The long-standing U.S. policy of support for Yugoslavia’s inde-
pendence, territorial integrity and unity remains unchanged, as does
our understanding and respect for Yugoslavia’s nonaligned position;
—We have been impressed by the calm, confident behavior of the
Yugoslav Government and peoples during the past few months, which
saw not only President Tito’s illness, but also a rise in international
tension caused by the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan;
—For our part, we have tried to dampen unhelpful speculation
and rumors about events relating to Yugoslavia. In this we have worked
closely with the Federal Secretariat for Foreign Affairs in Belgrade and
the Yugoslav Embassy in Washington. Ambassador Loncar’s (LOHN
char) experience and skill have helped us greatly;
—We have also been keeping careful watch on anti-Yugoslav ter-
rorist activity within the United States. The President has made it clear
12 In the “Non-Aligned Movement” section of Mondale’s briefing materials, the
Department noted that Tito’s death left no clear succession in NAM for the leadership
of the moderate group of nations, but that Cuba’s “efforts to exploit the NAM Chairman-
ship to radical ends have been rebuffed notably by the strong resistance of NAM moder-
ates” and that although the United States could not work with NAM as an organization
under Cuba’s chairmanship, it would continue to “work closely on specific issues of
mutual concern with individual NAM members, especially with moderates like Yugo-
slavia.” (Ibid.)

Yugoslavia
that this Administration will not tolerate illegal actions directed against
Yugoslav establishments and officials in the United States;13
—We understand the depth of your concern about emigre activities
at this time. We will do what we can to tamp this down and we have
expressed our opinion to the Governments of those countries with
large emigre populations; you must understand, however, that we can
do nothing which would interfere with emigre activities which do not
violate any U.S. law;
—I am aware of Secretary Kostic’s (KOS-TICH) discussion with
Secretary Miller regarding medium term balance of payments assist-
ance for Yugoslavia.14 We are well aware that Yugoslavia’s political
independence rests to an important degree on the strength of the econ-
omy. We are giving your request for assistance our close attention; and
—There is much that we can do together. We would like to keep
up the pace of high level political visits, and to consult frequently on
global and bilateral issues which concern us. We will do what we can
to encourage the further development of trade and economic relations.
In the important area of military cooperation, we remain ready to
respond to Yugoslav needs and desires.15
B. U.S.-Soviet Relations
1. Suggested Points
—Short to mid-term prospects for improvement in our relations
remain poor. We have seen no indication the Soviets are ready to
13 The “Terrorism Against Yugoslavia” briefing paper, prepared by the Department
of State on April 21 and included in Mondale’s briefing book, described the extent of
anti-Yugoslav terrorism in the United States and noted that “no other foreign government
represented in the United States has been the target of as many actual terrorist incidents
as the Yugoslav Government.” (Ibid.)
14 The Department prepared two briefing papers on the Yugoslav economy for
Mondale’s trip. In “The Yugoslav Economy in the Post-Tito Period,” the Department
noted that the period of rapid economic growth Yugoslavia experienced had overheated
the economy, pushed inflation to above 20 percent, and created a large trade deficit.
The paper also noted the “extreme regional disparity in living standards” between Yugoslav
regions. (Ibid.) In “The Bilateral Economic Relationship,” the Department noted the U.S.
Government had made “an intensive effort to promote economic relations” and that the
Yugoslavs had “come to view the United States as an economic partner which can lessen
the commercial risks of economic dependence on Western Europe and the political risks
15 The “Military Relationship” paper in Mondale’s briefing materials noted that
following the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, the United States “adopted a more forth-
coming arms transfer policy.” While the United States would not release the Harpoon
anti-ship missile to the Yugoslav military, the MK–46 anti-submarine missile sale was
being positively considered, as was the sale of F–5E aircraft. (Carter Library, National
Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 87, Yugoslavia: Briefing Book
for Tito Funeral, 5/80)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
withdraw from Afghanistan or seriously to seek a political solution
there on terms which we would find acceptable;
—The Soviet invasion of Afghanistan has posed a major threat to
peace and to a geographic region of vital importance. We consider it
important that the international community impose a cost on the Sovi-
ets which will deter them from similar actions in the future and ulti-
mately bring about their withdrawal from Afghanistan;
—The measures we have taken are intended to respond to the
seriousness of the Soviet action. We are determined to maintain our
sanctions until the Soviets withdraw;
—But our response has left intact the framework of U.S.-Soviet
relations, and we recognize the need to manage the East-West relation-
ship with dispassion and consistency. Specifically, we remain firmly
committed to further progress in arms control;
—We nonetheless believe it is impossible to divorce detente from
deterrence. A firm response now to Soviet aggression in Afghanistan
can only foster future progress in East-West relations; and
—The success of this approach, of course, depends upon the coop-
eration of the entire world community.
C. Soviet Foreign Policy
1. Suggested Points
—The Soviets appear to have underestimated the intensity of the
world response to Afghanistan, and we believe they are unlikely to
undertake any major new initiatives of similar magnitude in the period
ahead for fear of provoking further adverse reaction;
—Given the continuing resistance to their troops in Afghanistan
and their interest in allaying European concern, we think any overt
moves in Europe particularly unlikely, but we continue to monitor
Soviet military activities very closely;
—The Soviets are aware that we would view any effort on their
part to undermine Yugoslavia’s independence, territorial integrity and
unity with grave concern; and
—We have no reason to doubt, however, that the Soviets will
continue to press their interests in the Third World, either directly or
through such proxies as Cuba and Vietnam.
D. Afghanistan
1. Essential Factors
If Tito had lived we would have expected to see the Yugoslavs play
an active role in efforts to launch a diplomatic initiative on Afghanistan.
They may still play a constructive role but without Tito’s guiding

Yugoslavia
hand it seems unlikely that they will be willing to take the lead in
international efforts. Yugoslav interests have coincided with our
own since no formulation which would legitimize continued Soviet
military presence in Afghanistan would be acceptable to Yugoslavia
given its concerns about any weakening of nonaligned opposition
to intervention.
In his February 25 letter to President Tito, the President stressed
U.S. support for a neutral nonaligned Afghan government acceptable
to the Afghan people and said that with Soviet withdrawal, the U.S.
would be willing to join with the neighbors of Afghanistan in a guaran-
tee of Afghanistan’s true neutrality and of non-interference in Afghani-
stan’s internal affairs.16
The Soviets show no signs of planning to reduce their presence
and in a variety of ways have indicated their intention to remain in
the country. At the same time, the Babrak regime is experiencing deep
internal divisions. Thus, the Soviets seem far from achieving their twin
objectives of establishing a viable regime in Kabul and pacifying the
countryside.
2. Suggested Points
—We believe it is of extreme importance that all countries, espe-
cially major nonaligned and Islamic states, cooperate with international
efforts to make the Soviets pay a heavy and continued price for their
aggression;
—The United States has taken a series of strong bilateral and multi-
lateral initiatives to demonstrate to the USSR our resolve. We would
welcome any suggestions on how we might individually or jointly
proceed in further pressing for an early Soviet withdrawal and the
establishment of a popularly supported government in Kabul;
—On April 17, the Afghan regime announced a package of propos-
als allegedly aimed at promoting a political solution of the Afghan
conflict. The basic elements of this package are proposals for bilateral
Afghan negotiations with Iran and Pakistan to normalize relations to
be followed by a regional conference which would agree on a regional
peace framework. Ultimately these talks would be expanded to include
Indian Ocean and Persian Gulf states with the purpose of making the
entire area a zone of peace;
—In our view, this Afghan proposal is fully supported by the USSR
and probably was drafted in Moscow. We do not believe it represents
a serious effort to end the Afghan crisis; and

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
—Our foremost problem with the proposal is that it does not
require the withdrawal of Soviet forces, but does require the recogni-
tion by other states of the current Soviet-installed Afghan regime as a
precondition for negotiations. It does not take into account the interest
of the majority of Afghans who are struggling for their right of self-
determination against the Soviets and the Babrak Karmal regime.
E. Iran
1. Suggested Points
—The release of our people remains a paramount interest of our
policy toward Iran. As the President’s recent actions clearly demon-
strate, we will not tolerate continuation of this situation.17 We will not
relax our effort until the hostages are free;
—We appreciate the helpful role which Yugoslavia has played in
this crisis, particularly in talking to the Iranian authorities about the
condition of the hostages and the need for Iran to put this problem
behind it to better focus on the real problems facing the country.18 We
hope the Yugoslavs can continue to exert their considerable influence
on Iran. We believe that Iran’s problems of internal unrest and economic
development are now overshadowed by the increased Soviet threat to
the countries of the region;
—Our rescue attempt was a humanitarian one and was not directed
against Iran or the people of Iran; and
—Now, and especially later, when the hostage question is finally
resolved, the Yugoslav Government can do much to keep Iran truly
nonaligned. Such a foreign policy course would be in the best interests
of Iran and other countries.
hostages in Iran on April 24.
has publicly and unequivocally supported the release of our hostages in Tehran. They
have expressed this in statements in Belgrade and by their words and actions at the
UN.” However, Eagleburger cautioned, the Yugoslav leadership had limited influence
on Iran’s new leaders. Belgrade, he continued, intends to develop closer ties to Iran in
order to strengthen its own position in the Non-Aligned Movement, and could not be
expected to give much more support or welcome a tougher U.S. stance on Iran. (National
frank” conversation with Iranian Foreign Minister Ghotbzadeh on May 12. Vrhovec told
Eagleburger that he had stressed with the Iranian Foreign Minister the need to free the
hostages, that many prominent non-aligned leaders shared that view, and that, as long
as the hostage situation continued, “it would be difficult for the non-aligned states fully
to support the other ‘legitimate and progressive’ aims of the Iranian Revolution.” Vrhovec
also told Eagleburger that Ghotbzadeh responded that Iran wants to free the hostages,
but, in light of the recent U.S. rescue attempt, “the Iranian people ‘would neither under-
stand nor accept’ their being set free now.” (Telegram 3751 from Belgrade, May 12;

Yugoslavia
F. Nonaligned Movement
1. Suggested Points
—We understand and appreciate the significance of Yugoslavia’s
role in the Nonaligned Movement. In our frank discussions on issues
of concern to the Nonaligned Movement, we have felt free both to
express our concerns and to offer our advice. We would like to encour-
age the continued development of this practice;
—We admired the efforts of Yugoslavia to organize nonaligned
condemnation of the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan. This has been
a restraining factor on Soviet behavior at this crucial time.
289.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, May 6, 1980
SUBJECT
You are scheduled to meet briefly with Yugoslav Ambassador
Loncar to express personally your condolences, and those of the Ameri-
can people, on Tito’s death.2 Loncar will not bring the condolence book
with him.3 (C)
Such a meeting will be seen as an important political gesture by
the Yugoslavs and will underscore our support for the new Yugoslav
leadership. Brezhnev signed the condolence book at the Yugoslav
Embassy in Moscow this morning and will be going to the funeral.
We want to make an equally strong impression. (C)
2 Tito’s condition deteriorated rapidly due to complications from gangrene, and he
slipped into a coma. He died on May 4, three days before his 88th birthday.
3 In a May 5 memorandum to Carter, Brzezinski recommended that the President
visit the Yugoslav Embassy and sign the condolence book. Brzezinski wrote that “such
a gesture would underscore our support for Yugoslavia at a critical moment and empha-
size your respect and esteem for President Tito.” Carter disapproved the recommendation
telling his appointments secretary, Phil Wise, “no way!” (Carter Library, National Security
Affairs, Staff Material, Europe, USSR, and East/West, Larrabee Subject File, Box 68,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
I recommend that you:
—express your admiration for Tito as a great statesman and leader
who contributed significantly to strengthening world peace. You might
mention your extended correspondence with Tito, which he highly
valued.
—reiterate our firm support for Yugoslavia’s independence, unity
and territorial integrity and our respect for Yugoslavia’s nonaligned
position.
—express confidence in the new Yugoslav leadership’s ability to
handle the transition.
—regret that you could not attend the funeral as you had hoped
and note that you have asked the Vice President to represent you. (C)
The meeting should only take about five minutes. There will be a
photo opportunity. (U)
You met Loncar when he presented his credentials in Novem-
290.
Telegram From the Embassy in Yugoslavia to the
Department of State1
3621. Subj: Tito Funeral: VP Mondale Bilateral With Kolisevski.
1. S-entire text.
2. Summary: SFRY Presidency President Lazar Kolisevski met
for a special bilateral with Vice President Mondale shortly after the
Vice President’s arrival in Belgrade on May 7 at the head of the US
delegation to the funeral of Yugoslav President Tito.2 Accompanying
the Vice President were Secretary of the Treasury Miller; Ambassador
Eagleburger; Assistant Secretary George Vest; New York Federal
Reserve Bank Chairman Anthony Solomon; Deputy Assistant to the
President David Aaron; and Assistant to the Vice President Denis Clift.
Yugoslavs present in addition to Kolisevski included Foreign Secretary
Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Also sent to the White House. Drafted by Dunlop; cleared
by Clift.
Presidency of Yugoslavia for a one-year term. Upon Tito’s death on May 4, he assumed
the office of the Presidency. He was replaced by Cvijetin Mijatovic on May 15, 1980. See
Document 288.

Yugoslavia
Josip Vrhovec; FEC Vice President Dr. Ivo Margan; and (former)
Ambassador Dimce Belovski. Although besieged with the presence of
almost 100 high level foreign delegations in Belgrade for the funeral,
President Kolisevski alloted an hour to the meeting, which was marked
by an extremely friendly and open atmosphere. This memorandum
has been cleared by the Vice President’s staff.
3. Subjects covered, on the U.S. side: Great respect and admiration
for President Tito and sorrow at his passing; confidence in Yugoslavia’s
future; U.S. support for the independence, sovereignty and unity of
Yugoslavia, and readiness to assist Yugoslavia if asked; U.S. concern
over our hostages in Tehran; U.S. determination to curb anti-Yugoslav
terrorism; and our wish to pursue detente but deep concern over the
Soviet invasion of Afghanistan.
4. Subjects covered by the Yugoslavs: Genuine appreciation for the
expressions of concern from President Carter and the American people
during President Tito’s illness; approval of the current excellent state
of bilateral relations; a desire to accomplish more in the international
struggle against terrorism; an assertion that the Tehran hostage situa-
tion will be raised by Foreign Secretary Vrhovec during a planned
meeting in Belgrade with Iranian Foreign Minister Ghotbzadeh;3 appre-
hension over the deteriorating international situation, especially in
Soviet-U.S. relations; and the desire somehow to re-engage the Non-
Aligned Movement in putting detente back on the rails. End summary.
5. President Kolisevski opened the meeting by saying that he had
just read a message reporting what the President had said about Presi-
dent Tito prior to the Vice President’s departure from Washington.4
This is very much appreciated. The Vice President stated that he had
been asked by President Carter to convey the deep regret and sorrow
of the entire American people at the passing of President Tito, one of
the great leaders of this generation and true hero. The Vice President
said he had come to Belgrade to represent the President and the Ameri-
can people, to memorialize a great human being. This may be a time
of sadness, but “the victory of Tito’s life stands as an example for us all.”
6. The Vice President observed that his personal sorrow is all the
greater because of having met President Tito, first in 1977 when the
Vice President was the first visitor of this administration to Yugoslavia.
Also remembered vividly is his meeting in 1978 in Washington when
President Tito last visited the U.S.
7. President Kolisevski wanted the Vice President to know how
much the words of friendship and support by President Carter in the

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
last months had been appreciated by President Tito. He recalled that
the day that President Tito was first to be operated upon, with Foreign
Secretary Vrhovec and LCY Presiding Officer Doronjski he had visited
the President in the hospital in Ljubljana. Together they had reviewed
the world situation. President Tito had decided to send a message to
President Carter.5 When he had recovered somewhat, President Tito
had insisted on reviewing the draft text of the message to President
Carter, because he placed such great importance on their personal
relationship. Then, President Tito had received the message from Presi-
dent Carter. Its personal nature had touched him very much, Kolisevski
asserted. Tito recalled with particular appreciation the first sentence
in that letter, in which President Carter had said that he and his wife
Roslyn were praying for his recovery.6
8. Turning to our bilateral relationship, President Kolisevski noted
that the statements of U.S. support for Yugoslavia from various Ameri-
can leaders since President Tito fell ill “have been positively assessed.”
He hoped the Vice President did not think he was exaggerating, but
Ambassador Eagleburger could confirm that the Yugoslav people have
received President Tito’s death with dignity, calm, and with resolution.
Perhaps it would come as a surprise to some, but there has not been
the slightest disturbance throughout the country. It is almost as if the
Secretary for Internal Affairs has nothing to do.
9. Kolisevski also observed that it is the Yugoslav hope that during
these solemn days, Belgrade would become “an oasis of peace”. The
current leaders of Yugoslavia had worked together with Tito in the
revolution and in building a new political system, and in the struggle
for peace. “Therefore, we consider the accomplishments you see as
both his and ours.” The Yugoslav people, who suffered 1.7 million
5 On February 21, Eagleburger was asked by Vrhovec to deliver the text of Tito’s
letter to Carter. Vrhovec explained that Tito had approved the text of the letter prior to
falling gravely ill, and, while he could not sign it at the present time, wished that its
contents be delivered to Carter. Kolisevski signed a cover letter to Carter. Tito’s letter
dealt extensively with the Yugoslav opposition to the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan
and Tito’s concern that détente be preserved by any possible means. (Telegram 1401
from Belgrade, February 21; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
to President Tito, and the covering note to Vice President Kolisevski were sent to Belgrade
and Eagleburger was instructed to deliver them as soon as possible to Kolisevski. In his
letter to Tito, Carter emphasized his desire to see détente revived, but blamed the
Soviet invasion of Afghanistan for the deterioration of U.S.-Soviet relations. Carter also
expressed his thanks for the Yugoslav position on the release of U.S. hostages from Iran
and assured Tito of his administration’s continued support for Yugoslavia. (Telegram
WH80281 to Belgrade, February 25; Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski
Material, President’s Correspondence with Foreign Leaders File, Box 22, Yugoslavia:

Yugoslavia
casualties in World War II have overcome great tribulations to secure
their independence, and will continue to endure further if necessary.
“We know how to defend ourselves. As for our independence and
sovereignty, we will make no concessions to anyone, at any time.” He
added “This is why we approve the public stance you have taken.”
10. Vice President Mondale said that when he first came to
Yugoslavia in 1977 he had occasion to express American support for
Yugoslav sovereignty and unity, and also approval for Yugoslavia’s
role as leader in the Non-Aligned Movement. We continue “to stand
ready, as your friend, to be of assistance in ways you might think
proper and appropriate, to achieve your objectives.” He added, “I come
here today, expressly at the direction of the President, to repeat these
assurances of our friendship and our confidence in your leaders.”
11. The Vice President continued that in the past three years our
bilateral relationship has become as good as it had ever been. The
relationship between our two Presidents had gone beyond that which
usually develops between Chiefs of State. President Carter greatly
relied on President Tito’s judgment as a statesman and on his vast
knowledge of the world. We are prepared, the Vice President contin-
ued, further to develop and broaden that relationship through future
high level political meetings or discussions at a technical level, on
economic assistance or in the military area. He noted that Secretary of
the Treasury Miller and Chairman of the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York Solomon were present. President Kolisevski suggested that
separate discussions be held between Messrs. Miller and Solomon with
Federal Executive Council Vice President Ikonic and with Minister of
Finance Kostic. As for the military area, Kolisevski said that he thought
both sides are adequately in touch. Vice President Mondale agreed,
observing that General Graves had recently visited Belgrade.
12. Turning to the subject of anti-Yugoslav violence in the U.S., Vice
President Mondale noted there are now 17 criminals in U.S. prisons.
The Carter administration is bitterly opposed to terrorism. He could
assure President Kolisevski that at this particularly sensitive time, U.S.
security authorities all over the country have been alerted to increase
protection of Yugoslav establishments. Mr. Aaron added that as a
member of the National Security Council he had taken part in several
meetings with the Department of Justice and could add his assurances
that our police are as alert as they could be.
13. Kolisevski was glad to hear this. Similar assurances had been
received from several countries in Western Europe. This is a very
important subject. Acts of terror can only hinder relationships between
countries. The holding of U.S. hostages in Tehran is a good example
of this. Relations between two countries can be harmed even if the acts
of terror are carried out between agents of other countries. Interference

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
by intelligence services of third countries can do great harm by
fomenting violence, Kolisevski continued.
14. Vice President Mondale thanked President Kolisevski for his
remark about our hostages. This has been a terrible experience for
Americans. Every successful act of terrorism enhances what the terror-
ists seek, which is the very antithesis of civilization. Kolisevski said
that the GOY has tried to do what it could in the hostage situation
but it had not been much. He noted that Iranian Foreign Minister
Ghotbzadeh will be meeting Foreign Secretary Vrhovec in Belgrade
and will raise the hostage situation. We will tell them “Keeping the
hostages only shows that the revolution is still unstable, and that this
undermines the stability of the region.”
15. Kolisevski asked whether the American side is interested in
meeting with Ghotbzadeh in Belgrade. Vice President Mondale replied
that he thought this would be inappropriate. Mr. Aaron said that it
would be particularly appreciated if the Yugoslavs could learn anything
at all about the physical condition of our hostages, who have now been
moved out of our Embassy compound. The Vice President added that
it is all the more important now that regular visits to the hostages by
the Red Cross or other agencies be allowed.
16. The Vice President said that he believes Ghotbzadeh has tried
to be as helpful as any Iranian leader during this situation, as to some
extent has Bani-Sadr. Kolisevski observed that the pressure from the
religious conservatives “on progressive and democratic elements” is
enormous. Foreign Secretary Vrhovec plans to discuss with Ghotzba-
deh “the entire complex of questions” in the area, and would let us
know what transpires. The Vice President said that would be much
appreciated.
17. Secretary Vhrovec said that he would like to add a few words
more about the general subject of international terrorism. It is perhaps
correct to say that we do not always mean the same thing when we
use this term. Americans, he said, take the word terrorism in a narrow
sense, a particular act or event, and the Yugoslavs take a broader view.
Perhaps it would be good to seek a common definition of terrorism
after which we could address the situation more efficiently. Vrhovec
wanted to emphasize however that cooperation between the two coun-
tries in this area has gone very far indeed. He recalled discussions in
Washington in 1978 between Presidents Carter and Tito, and also what
the Vice President said himself personally on this subject. Former visits
to the U.S. by Tito had in some sense been marred by unpleasant
moments, but the last visit to Washington President Tito had cherished.
Tito frequently recalled that in discussing the visit with his colleagues
he felt that real progress had been made on the key issue of violence.
18. President Kolisevski observed that Yugoslavia for years has
one of the world’s best records for lack of terrorist activity on its

Yugoslavia
soil. But, he added, Yugoslav Ambassadors and diplomats have been
attacked abroad and killed. Their Ambassador to Sweden had been
brutally murdered in 1971 and “his murderers have been roaming
around free.” In this the U.S. shares a common, sad experience.
19. At this point, Kolisevski thought, enough has been said about
this unfortunate topic. He inquired about the prospects for relations
between the U.S. and USSR. He asked if the Vice President thought
detente would survive. In recent discussions with Guinean President
Sekou Toure it had been decided to try to “consolidate” efforts within
the non-aligned to see if something cannot be done to restore momen-
tum toward detente. However, Kolisevski observed, much more
depends on the U.S. and USSR.
20. Vice President Mondale recalled that the Carter administration
entered into office profoundly committed to detente, to concluding
negotiations for SALT II, Force Reductions in Europe, and the Compre-
hensive Test Ban. We were prepared to expand our political relation-
ship with the Soviet Union. “I regret to say,” the Vice President stated,
“that no other aspect in our administration has proven more disap-
pointing.” SALT II, the centerpiece of our relationship with the Soviet
Union, was going to be ratified. As presiding officer of the Senate he
had been working on this, and was then confident that it would be
ratified. Now, the Soviets had invaded a neighbor. “In my opinion this
is one of the worst international acts since World War II.” This has
soured feelings greatly in America, as Ambassador Belovski knows.
21. The Vice President said Americans must now ponder the impact
of the Soviet action. If the Soviet Union can invade Afghanistan today
why not some other country tomorrow? This is profoundly disturbing.
22. The Vice President continued, we nonetheless want to find a
solution to world problems, and we have offered that our new Secretary
of State, Ed Muskie, meet with Gromyko this month in Vienna. We
have not had a response from the Soviets yet.
23. The Vice President observed that the U.S. had found it disap-
pointing, as he supposes it was disappointing to Tito himself, that in
this extremely complex situation the Non-Aligned Movement has not
been able to assert leadership. Can the principles of international
respect and non-intervention be restored? These are fundamental prin-
ciples for humanity. If these are not observed what are the prospects
for peace in the long run?
24. President Kolisevski noted that, since the Afghan invasion,
Foreign Secretary Vhrovec has visited India, Bangladesh and Iraq. This
question has risen everywhere. The Afghan crisis is not essentially a
crisis within the Non-Aligned Movement but its coordinator is Cuba
and this complicates matters. Yugoslavia has suggested a Non-Aligned
Ministerial meeting to focus on general principles and not on specific

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
events for “we do not wish to see the movement split.” The NAM must
focus on reestablishing respect for the vital principles of international
conduct. This is still being discussed in Belgrade. It was with Sekou
Toure and will be with the Iraqis and also Kaunda.
25. President Kolisevski also recalled that in his last letter to Brezh-
nev President Tito called for a withdrawal of Soviet forces from Afghan-
istan and appealed to him to let the Afghan people settle their own
affairs according to their own wishes and traditions. Kolisevski said
this also had been stated by the Yugoslavs publicly. This position is
very much appreciated, Vice President Mondale said.
26. He then thanked President Kolisevski for the time he had taken
during a day with such a heavy schedule. Their discussion was a most
useful opportunity to review the U.S. commitment to a strong and
friendly relationship, and to say again that the U.S. is prepared to
assist, as and if the Yugoslavs find appropriate.
27. President Kolisevski asked Vice President Mondale to convey
on behalf of all the peoples of Yugoslavia best wishes to President
Carter “for his own success and for the well being of your country.”
Eagleburger
291.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, June 6, 1980
SUBJECT
Presidential Determination to Permit IMET for Yugoslavia (U)
Ed Muskie recommends that you sign a determination permitting
Yugoslav officers to study in the United States under the International
Military Education and Training program (Tab A).2 OMB, Defense, and
ACDA concur. (U)
randum was forwarded to Brzezinski on June 6 by Kimmitt. Carter initialed the memoran-
dum, indicating he saw it.
2 Attached but not printed at Tab A is a May 30 memorandum from Muskie to
Carter, with the recommendation that Carter approve the use of funds for two IMET
positions for Yugoslavian officers.

Yugoslavia
I also recommend that you sign the determination. Over the past
year, the Yugoslavs have shown a keen interest in enhancing military
relations with the United States. The resumption of attendance of their
officers at U.S. military schools is a significant step toward reestablish-
ment of a mutually beneficial military relationship. In addition, as your
briefing papers for the Belgrade visit later this month will show,3 the
Yugoslavs are again seeking access to sophisticated U.S. weapons,
including F–5 aircraft, and the resumption of military schooling
will provide a good foundation for addressing this more difficult
question. (C)
RECOMMENDATION:
That you sign the determination attached to the Muskie memoran-
dum at Tab A.4 (U)
3 In a May 14 memorandum to Carter, Brzezinski recommended approval of a one-
day stop in Yugoslavia and one-day stop in Spain following the NATO summit in Venice.
Brzezinski suggested that a Presidential stopover in Belgrade would “underscore our
strong and continued support for Yugoslavia’s independence” as well as “offset some
of the adverse media criticism for your failure to attend Tito’s funeral.” Carter approved
the recommendation on May 20. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material,
Europe, USSR, and East/West, Larrabee Subject File, Box 69, [Yugoslavia: President’s

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
292.
Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the
Department of State (Tarnoff) to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, June 7, 1980
SUBJECT
Yugoslav Financial Situation
In response to your memo of June 22 asking for a report on what
we are doing to be responsive to Yugoslav request for economic assist-
ance, we convened a meeting of the Interagency Group for Europe on
June 5 to review steps under consideration.3
Treasury will be responding separately concerning Secretary
Muskie’s [Miller’s] efforts to arrange for discussions between Yugoslav
National Bank and US bankers about a major new loan. At the IG
meeting we stressed the importance of making it clear to the Yugoslavs
before the President’s trip that the Yugoslav bankers would be welcome
here for discussions as soon as possible. The President will certainly
be able to stress his personal interest in this matter and Secretary
Miller’s efforts to arrange for meetings. The Yugoslav request for an
IMF standby of some $400 million came before the IMF board on June
6 and was approved, with the active support of the US Executive
Director. The President will be able to point to our consistent support
for Yugoslavia in the IMF and the importance of close cooperation
with the IMF in resolving Yugoslavia’s balance of payments problem.
The Export-Import Bank representative at the IG meeting pointed
out that the Bank would continue to provide projected financing for
Yugoslavia in 1980 in amounts consistent with past years. The President
will be able to point to Exim’s active role in US-Yugoslav trade over
the years and confirm that the Bank will continue to be active in
Yugoslavia in the time ahead.
The Treasury representative reported to the IG that he expected
Treasury approval of payment of monthly federal benefits to Yugoslav
beneficiaries in dollars rather than dinars before the President’s trip.
The sum involved, some $14 million, will not have a major impact on
2 Not found.
3 The Department forwarded a summary of the meeting, chaired by Barry, in tele-
File, D800286–0983)

Yugoslavia
Yugoslav finances but the action would be an important indication of
our readiness to be helpful.
State and AID are discussing the possibility of establishing Yugo-
slavia’s eligibility to compete on US-Yugoslav tenders for local service
contracts overseas. Again the impact would be small but it would be
a welcome gesture to the Yugoslavs. On the question of financing
military sales to Yugoslavia, State and Defense agreed that there was
no possible solution outside the US Foreign Military Sales program
which the Yugoslavs are reluctant to use because they believe it would
tarnish their non-aligned image. During the forthcoming US-Yugoslav
Joint Military Committee meeting the week before the President’s
arrival,4 Defense will be prepared to explain the FMS program in more
detail and describe the nature of our programs with other nonaligned
countries. If the question of financing of military sales comes up during
the President’s visit, it was agreed that the best solution would be to
recommend that the Yugoslavs reconsider their position on FMS.
The Agriculture representative pointed out that the PL480 Title
I program would not be available for Yugoslavia given policy and
budgetary constraints.
There was considerable discussion of the possibility of assisting
Yugoslavia in some way to increase its exports to the US, thus closing
the sizeable trade gap. It was agreed that there was little prospect of
greater Yugoslav use of the Generalized System of Preferences to pro-
vide concessionary access to the US market. However, we have
included language in the draft joint statement to be issued during the
President’s trip pointing to the importance of expanded mutual trade.
Late news received today indicates that there is greater urgency
than we had assumed to help the Yugoslavs with their financial situa-
tion, and to act before the President’s visit. The Yugoslavs today
announced a 30 percent devaluation and Yugoslav Ambassador Loncar
told Ambassador Eagleburger in Belgrade that, as a result of a June 5
decision by the Yugoslav Government, they will ask us for an urgent
swap arrangement.5 This may result from pessimistic reactions the
Yugoslavs have received from US banks on their interest in new balance
of payments borrowings and the “political strings” which certain Arab
countries want to attach to loans they would grant Yugoslavia.
Embassy reported on the meeting in telegram 4906 from Belgrade, June 19. (National
5 The Embassy reported Loncar’s meeting with Eagleburger in telegram 4516 from

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
In response to Ambassador Loncar’s request, Treasury is attempt-
ing to arrange a meeting for him with Secretary Miller early next week.6
Treasury’s initial reaction is that use of the Emergency Support Fund
may be the best way to respond to the new Yugoslav request.
Peter Tarnoff7
the Yugoslav economic situation. Stressing that “the GOY is having trouble getting its
act together,” Eagleburger concluded that, unless the Yugoslav Government corrected
the current trends, the economic situation “can get very much worse.” (National Archives,
May 23 and Loncar asked him to “meet with five or six of the leading U.S. bankers”
and persuade them to lend to Yugoslavia. (Telegram 136134 to Belgrade, May 24; National
Loncar that, following his discussions with David Rockefeller, he believed that the best
way to proceed was to have the Yugoslav Government seek a syndication loan organized
by a leading U.S. bank, possibly Chase. Miller recommended that the Yugoslav Govern-
ment be prepared to send representatives from the Yugoslav National Bank to New
York to discuss such a loan with private lending institutions sometime in early June.
File, D800264–0731)
7 Seitz signed for Tarnoff above this typed signature.
293.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
Yugoslavia1
154447. Subject: Vice President’s June 11 Meeting With Yugoslav
Ambassador Loncar.
1. (C-entire text).
2. Begin summary: The Vice President met with Yugoslav Ambassa-
dor Loncar for half an hour on June 11. Loncar, who had just come
from a meeting with Treasury Secretary Miller where the Yugoslav
Confidential; Immediate; Exdis. Drafted by Barry; cleared by Clift and Larrabee; approved
by Barry.

Yugoslavia
balance of payments problem was discussed (septel),2 asked for the
meeting in order to follow up on the Vice President’s attendance at
the Tito funeral.3 The Vice President stressed how impressed he was
at the way the new leadership is handling Yugoslavia’s problems and
expressed concern about the Yugoslav financial situation and anti-
Yugoslav terrorism. Loncar expressed pleasure with the unprecedented
progress in US-Yugoslav relations and discussed the President’s visit
and dynamics of the Nonaligned Movement. The Vice President said
he would like to meet periodically with Loncar to discuss Yugoslav
developments. End summary.
3. The Vice President opened the discussion by saying how im-
pressed he had been during the Tito funeral at the sense of confidence
of the new leadership and the Yugoslav people. Paraphrasing Mark
Twain, he said that press reports of the problems of post-Tito Yugo-
slavia were grossly exaggerated. Tito had used the years well in prepar-
ing for the transition to a new leadership. Post-Tito Yugoslavia certainly
faces problems but the prospects for success in dealing with them are
good. The Vice President noted that Loncar had just come from a
meeting with Secretary Miller at which Yugoslavia’s financial problems
were discussed. This was a matter of concern to all of us and we hope
we could be helpful. The Vice President referred to the bombing of
Yugoslav DCM Sindjelic’s house as an outrage and pointed to the
difficulties we had in educating other countries about US law. US
law enforcement authorities are making a major effort to find those
responsible for this crime. The Vice President referred to the “full court
press” the FBI had instituted at the time of the Tito funeral to prevent
terrorist incidents.
4. Loncar expressed gratitude for being received by the Vice
President and said that he was glad that he had been in Yugoslavia
for the funeral—not only to pay condolences to Tito but also to see the
country during a unique period in its history where self-confidence
and complete unity were reflected. He said his meeting with Secretary
Miller had been useful and that the GOY hoped that the USG and the
Secretary of the Treasury would be able to help with Yugoslavia’s
2 The meeting on June 11 between Miller and Loncar was reported in telegram
155726 to Belgrade, June 12. In the meeting, Loncar informed Miller that the Yugoslav
Government found Rockefeller’s suggestion of a $500 million syndicated loan as insuffi-
cient, and that the Yugoslav Government hoped to keep U.S. and Canadian loans separate
from European loans. Miller told Loncar that, if the Yugoslav Government presented
its case well and prepared the groundwork, it might be able to get more than Rockefeller
suggested initially, if indeed its case was strong. (National Archives, RG 59, Central
Foreign Policy File, D800288–0545)
with Yugoslav leaders, see Document 290.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
financial problems. Loncar said that Miller had expressed gratification
with Yugoslavia’s stabilization program.
5. The Vice President pointed out that he had brought Secretary
Miller along on his delegation to the funeral because of our desire to
be helpful.
6. Loncar continued that through its efforts to help Yugoslavia over
this financial problem the US had an opportunity to broaden ties with
Yugoslavia in all fields—military, economic and political. On the terror-
ism issue he said that the most important fact was that progress was
being made. He had told Attorney General Civiletti what he thought
was good and what needed improvement in US efforts to control
terrorism and he did not want to go over the same ground again but
that the arrest of only a few more terrorists would do much to control
the problem.
7. Turning to the President’s visit, Loncar referred to the pioneering
role which the Vice President had had in his 1977 visit to Yugoslavia
which came after four bad years in US-Yugoslav relations. This is the
perfect time for President Carter to come, capping the remarkable
progress made in the last three years. Loncar referred to the great
popularity which President Carter enjoys in Yugoslavia particularly
after the statements he made concerning US policy toward Yugoslavia
in February of this year and at the time of Tito’s death. Loncar said
that the visit was taking place at a time of tension in international
affairs and that the Yugoslav leadership would be ready to discuss
these problems forthrightly. The very solid US-Yugoslav relationship
is one which has a wider impact which Yugoslavia can use. However,
Loncar cautioned that it would be important not to sound confronta-
tional notes about US-Soviet relations during the President’s visit since
this would create problems for Yugoslavia and diminish the importance
of the visit. The Vice President assured Loncar of the President’s under-
standing on this point.
8. Loncar continued with the description of the dynamics of the
nonaligned movement leading up to the Havana Summit and beyond.
Discussing Yugoslav and Cuban proposals for a NAM Ministerial,
Loncar said there were two issues. One issue was the location of the
conference and here Yugoslavia and others had been insisting that the
conference must be in Sri Lanka, Tanzania or Indonesia or there would
be no conference. More important than the form was the substance
and here Yugoslavia was very active to insure the proper focus. The
Vice President assured Loncar of our appreciation of the constructive
role which Yugoslavia played in the nonaligned movement.
9. In closing the Vice President told Loncar he would welcome the
opportunity to continue this kind of exchange in the future.
Muskie

Yugoslavia
294.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, undated
SUBJECT
European Trip: Belgrade (U)
With Tito’s death, Yugoslavia is entering the most critical period
of its postwar history. For three decades Tito’s name was synonymous
with Yugoslavia. He was the architect of Yugoslavia’s unique domestic
system with its emphasis on self-management and the driving force
behind its independent foreign policy. And in times of crisis he was
the ultimate guarantor of the country’s unity. (C)
His passing leaves a political and psychological void which will
be hard to fill. While we are relatively confident of the ability of the
new leadership to handle the problems posed by the transition—at
least in the short run—many of the centrifugal forces that have plagued
Yugoslavia in the past are likely to reemerge and in the long run they
could pose serious threats to the country’s political stability and non-
aligned position. Moreover, the transition comes at a time of heightened
international tension, prompted in particular by the Soviet invasion of
Afghanistan, which the Yugoslavs see as an indication of the Soviets
increased willingness to use force to solve international problems. Thus
beneath the tranquil facade projected over the last six weeks the new
Yugoslav leadership is uneasy and they will be looking for indications
of our continued willingness to provide support in this difficult period
Against this background, your trip to Yugoslavia takes on particu-
lar significance. It will be the first visit to Yugoslavia by a head of state,
and I recommend you use it to achieve a number of basic objectives:
—To underscore our support for the new Yugoslav leadership and
our confidence in their ability to handle the transition.
Office File, Country Chron File, Box 12, Europe: 1980. Secret. Sent for information. Printed
from an uninitialed copy. On June 6, Rentschler sent the memorandum to Brzezinski
along with memoranda for Carter preparing for the stops in Rome, the Vatican, Madrid,
and Lisbon. (Ibid.) On June 12, Larrabee sent a memorandum to Brzezinski recommend-
ing that he sign the overview memorandum to Carter for inclusion in the briefing book,
which he did on June 13. (Ibid.) Eagleburger provided his own background memorandum
to the President on June 23. (National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Secretariat Staff,
Lawrence S. Eagleburger Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, Ambassador to
Chron, June, 1980)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
—To reaffirm the continuity of U.S. policy toward Yugoslavia.
—To establish a personal relationship with some of the key leaders
who will guide Yugoslavia’s destiny in the coming years.
—To make clear to the Yugoslav leadership, directly and person-
ally, the basic outlines of your policy on key international issues, partic-
ularly arms control and relations with the Soviets. (C)
The memorandum from Ed Muskie at Tab A2 effectively sets out
the background, setting and issues for your meeting with the new
Yugoslav leadership. (C)
Your host for your opening substantive discussions on the morning
of June 24 will be Cvijetin Mijatovic, who was elected President of the
State Presidency on May 15. Mijatovic, however, will be your counter-
part in name only. Under the system of rotating collective leadership
set up by Tito, power is dispersed among a number of institutions
and personalities in order to assure ethnic balance and representation.
Mijatovic will be replaced in less than a year—as will Stefan Doronski
the current Chairman of the Presidium (Politburo)—and he lacks the
prestige and authority to provide the type of strong leadership which
Tito provided. (C)
The real focal point of power is an “inner leadership” composed
of Dr. Vladimir Bakaric, head of the Croatian party and one of Tito’s
oldest and closest associates; Milos Minic, the former Foreign Minister
(whom you met during Tito’s visit to the United States in March 1978);
Nikola Ljubicic, the Defense Minister; and Stane Dolanc, the former
Secretary of the Presidium. These men formed the real locus of decision-
making during Tito’s illness, and it is they more than Mijatovic or
Doronski who will determine Yugoslavia’s destiny in the initial transi-
tion period. For this reason they have been brought into the substantive
discussions, and your remarks should be addressed as much, if not
more, to them as to Mijatovic and Doronski.3 (C)
Bilateral Issues
I suggest you begin any discussion of bilateral relations by noting
the progress we have made since Tito’s visit and reiterating your high
2 In an undated copy of Muskie’s memorandum to Carter, the Department noted
that the Yugoslav leadership was likely to “urge that more be done to help them with
their most serious problem at this time—the need for Western financing to cover their
balance of payments and defense needs.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff
Material, Office, Presidential Advisory Board, Box 76, Trip: Box 27)
administration consider an additional substantive meeting with Yugoslav Presidency
members as well as trying to “pre-cook” the meeting with Mijatovic. (National Archives,
gestion in a June 12 memorandum to Brzezinski. Brzezinski disapproved the recommen-
dation. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office
File, Country Chron File, Box 12, Europe: 1980)

Yugoslavia
esteem for Tito as a world leader. You might mention in this connection
your extended correspondence with Tito, to which the Yugoslavs attach
great importance.
While there are no major bilateral problems between Yugoslavia
and the United States, the Yugoslavs are likely to focus on two issues
in particular:
—Terrorism: In the wake of Tito’s death the Yugoslavs are under-
standably nervous about an upsurge of terrorism by emigre groups
operating in the U.S. and Western Europe. Their concern has been
heightened, moreover, by the bombing of the house of the Yugoslav
Charge here in Washington, Vladimir Sindjelic, on June 3. Over the
past three years—and particularly recently—we have taken firm efforts
to curb terrorist acts by emigre groups in the U.S., but the Yugoslavs
will undoubtedly press you to do more. In response to their pleas, I
suggest you reaffirm the pledge not to tolerate terrorist acts against
Yugoslav personnel and facilities, which you made in your public
statement issued on the occasion of Tito’s death. You can also point
to the Administration’s good record regarding the arrest and prosecu-
tion of emigre terrorists (some 17 arrests and/or prosecutions) as proof
of your determination to pursue a toughminded policy against emigre
terrorists. (C)
—Economic Assistance: The health of the Yugoslav economy will be
a key factor—perhaps the key factor—in determining how successfully
the new leadership will be able to manage the challenges it will face
in the difficult transition period ahead. At present the economy is beset
by major problems, which if not arrested, could seriously undermine
political cohesion and stability. Inflation is over 20 percent and the
Yugoslav foreign debt is nearly $13 billion. While a stabilization pro-
gram has been introduced, the Yugoslavs will have to obtain large-scale
economic assistance to avoid a further downturn in their economy. (C)
Economic assistance therefore is likely to be high on the list of
topics that the Yugoslav leaders will want to discuss with you. They
have already approached Bill Miller about U.S. Government assistance
in obtaining a large loan from U.S. banks, and they will consider our
willingness to be helpful as an important test of the sincerity of our
past pledges of support. I recommend that you convey a generally
sympathetic attitude to the Yugoslavs without giving the impression
that the United States Government can provide large-scale credits.
You might mention that you have already personally discussed the
Yugoslav financial situation with Bill Miller. He, in turn, has talked to
U.S. commercial bankers, particularly David Rockefeller, about putting
together a syndicate for a loan.4 (C)
4 Eagleburger also detailed the offer made by Rockefeller to the Yugoslav Govern-
ment in a June 23 memorandum to Carter. (National Archives, RG 59, Office of the
Secretariat Staff, Lawrence S. Eagleburger Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs,
Ambassador to Yugoslavia, Under Secretary of State for Management (1967–1984), Lot

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
In addition, you might make the following points as an indication
of our desire to be helpful:
1. The U.S. Executive Director of the IMF supported Yugoslavia’s
request to the IMF (on June 6) for second and third tranche drawings
totalling $440 million over an 18-month period.
2. The U.S. Department of Agriculture made CCC credits available
for Yugoslav imports of wheat in 1980 and is prepared to extend the
terms of repayment from the present one year to three years if Yugo-
slavia wishes. Further, USDA is prepared to provide additional CCC
credit guarantees in 1981.
3. The U.S. Social Security Administration will change its payments
to annuitants residing in Yugoslavia from dinars to dollars. (C)
International Issues
—U.S.-Soviet Relations/Afghanistan: The Yugoslavs are deeply con-
cerned by the deterioration in the international situation, particularly
the downturn in U.S.-Soviet relations and the Soviet invasion of
Afghanistan, which has direct implications for their own security. At
the same time they worry about the capacity of the U.S. to provide
coherent and effective leadership in the troubling times ahead. In your
discussion of international topics, therefore, I suggest you devote con-
siderable time to stressing the strategic threat posed by Soviet actions
in Afghanistan and your determination to make the Soviets pay a
high price for their aggression. You may also wish to encourage the
leadership to use their influence in the Non-aligned Movement to
obtain a public condemnation of the invasion. (S)
—Arms Control and Detente: The Yugoslavs maintain a strong
interest in arms control and a relaxation of international tensions,
which they see as enhancing their own security. At the same time,
they are concerned that increased tensions among the superpowers
will lead to greater Soviet pressure on Yugoslavia. It will be useful
therefore to stress your continued commitment to detente—but a
detente based on reciprocity and mutual restraint—and to make clear
that despite the setback in U.S.-Soviet relations, the U.S. intends to
continue to pursue those elements of detente which it considers to
be in its own interest, such as SALT, MBFR, CSCE and TNF arms
control negotiations. (S)
While it is unlikely that we can convince the Yugoslavs to publicly
support our TNF decision, it is important that they understand the
rationale behind it and how it bears on their own security. I suggest
you make the following points in particular:
—Our December decision was a response to a significant imbalance
of nuclear forces accentuated recently by the Soviet TNF build-up.
—Our objective is the restoration of a stable balance of long range
theater nuclear forces not an acceleration of the arms race.

Yugoslavia
—We are committed to TNF arms control negotiations and are
ready to start talking now. But to date the Soviets have adamantly
refused to negotiate unless the Alliance renounces its December deci-
sion. We can not do this because it would legitimate and perpetuate
Soviet superiority.
—The continued imbalance of long range theater nuclear forces
would have a negative impact not only on the security of the Alliance
but on Yugoslavia’s security as well. (S)
—Non-Aligned and Third World: The Yugoslavs are particularly
proud of their role in the Non-aligned Movement (NAM) which Tito
helped to found. While Belgrade’s influence is likely to diminish some-
what in the wake of Tito’s death, the Yugoslavs can still be quite
useful in countering Soviet and Cuban influence in the NAM. Thus I
recommend you stress the positive role the NAM could play in world
affairs if it is viewed as credible and neutral, and if Yugoslavia continues
to play an important role in it. Cuba will continue to try to aim the
NAM at the U.S. and at our bilateral problems. You may want to offer
a full briefing on U.S.-Cuban relations so that they could be better
prepared to respond to Castro’s charges. (S)
—Iran/Iraq: You may also wish to use any discussion with the
Yugoslav leadership on the NAM to explore ways in which the Yugo-
slavs can use their influence with Iran to obtain the release of the
hostages, and once they are released, to facilitate a normalization of
U.S.-Iranian relations. Similarly, the Yugoslavs have good relations
with Iraq, and it would be useful to get them to use their good offices
to help us improve our relations with Baghdad. (C)
295.
Memorandum of Conversation1
PARTICIPANTS
U.S.
The President
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski
Under Secretary David Newsom
Under Secretary Richard Cooper
the Federation.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
Ambassador Lawrence Eagleburger
Steve Larrabee, NSC Staff Member
Victor Jackovich (Interpreter)
Yugoslav
President Cvijetin Mijatovic
Lazar Kolisevski
Veselin Djuranovic
Josip Vrhovec
Sinan Hasani
Ambassador Budimir Loncar
Mirko Zaric
President Mijatovic opened the meeting by welcoming President
Carter to Yugoslavia. He thanked him for his message and expressed
his appreciation for the high-level delegation which the United States
had sent to President Tito’s funeral. The Yugoslav leadership, he said,
particularly appreciated the condolences that had been expressed
through the President’s mother. The Presidency of Yugoslavia was also
grateful for the messages of support for the non-aligned movement
transmitted by the Vice President at the funeral. (C)
President Mijatovic reiterated Yugoslavia’s constant commitment to
non-alignment and stressed that support for this position in the world
was very strong. President Carter’s visit, he said, came at the right time
and underscored the deepening of U.S.-Yugoslav bilateral relations.
He then suggested that President Carter begin the substantive portion
of the conversation, noting that he was eager to hear the President’s
assessment of international trends, particularly in areas of the world
where these trends could be improved. He also looked forward to
hearing the President’s assessment of his discussions in Venice2 and
of U.S.-Soviet relations and U.S.-Chinese relations. In return, the Yugo-
slavs would inform the President of issues that concerned them, partic-
ularly detente as well as the situation in the Middle East, Iran and
Afghanistan. The Yugoslav leaders also looked forward to discussing
the situation in the non-aligned movement, especially their own per-
spective on the situation. Lastly, they looked forward to a discussion
of bilateral relations, which President Mijatovic noted were “good.” (C)
President Carter began by noting that he had come in the spirit of
peace, friendship and support for the independence and integrity of
Yugoslavia. The welcome at the airport, the outpouring of enthusiasm
along the way to the Palace and the beauty of the Palace itself were
impressive. But even more impressive had been the tomb of President
Tito. This was perhaps the most appropriate memorial to a great leader
2 President Carter traveled to Venice to take part in the G–7 Economic Summit June

Yugoslavia
he had ever seen—simple, tasteful and solemn, but not depressing. It
well reflected President Tito’s life. (C)
In this connection, President Carter remarked that he was pleased
to accept the invitation to come to Yugoslavia even after Tito’s death
and was gratified by the warm welcome he had received. President
Tito’s own life had exemplified his commitment to freedom and inde-
pendence, values which were deeply imbedded in the hearts of all the
peoples of Yugoslavia. (C)
Turning to his discussions at Venice, President Carter noted that
the discussions had reflected a common commitment on the part of
the countries represented at the meeting that they stood united in
support of the independence, unity and territorial integrity of Yugo-
slavia. He wanted the Yugoslav leadership to know that the United
States was Yugoslavia’s friend and that we stood ready to help in any
way that the leadership might require. In this connection, he under-
scored the importance of the non-aligned status of Yugoslavia, noting
that Yugoslavia had maintained a position of genuine non-alignment
despite efforts by Cuba and others to distort the charter of the NAM.
The United States considered the actions of President Tito at Havana
to be a triumph for the NAM. (C)
Turning again to the discussions at Venice, President Carter said
that one of the most important topics discussed had been the economic
problems created by the dramatic increase in the price of oil. All nations
needed to face the challenge presented by this increase in the spirit of
cooperation and mutual assistance. Unemployment and inflation had
been created by the rapid increase in the price of oil. The United States
was eager to help Yugoslavia alleviate these problems by pursuing
credit through its private banks. Secretary Miller and Under Secretary
Cooper were assisting in this effort. (C)
The President noted in this connection that he was aware that David
Rockefeller had recently been in Yugoslavia as a representative of
the private banks. While the banks were independent of government
control, the Administration was eager to work with Yugoslavia on
economic matters, both now and in the future. He noted that the devel-
oped countries presently had a net deficit of $70 billion per year; the
less developed countries had a net deficit of $50 billion per year. OPEC,
on the other hand, had a surplus of $120 billion. This created problems
both for the United States and for Yugoslavia, and underscored the
importance of close consultations. (C)
Turning to the question of the non-aligned movement, the President
emphasized the need for strengthening the movement, particularly in
the wake of the invasion of Afghanistan. This had been discussed at
Venice. The common position of the countries represented there was
that the Soviet troops had to be totally withdrawn from Afghanistan.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
With this withdrawal, the United States would be willing to cooperate
with other countries to help insure the establishment of a non-aligned
Afghanistan and a government which corresponded to the will of the
Afghan people. (C)
Soviet actions in Afghanistan, the President stressed, posed a serious
challenge to detente. The U.S. response had been peaceful and designed
to resolve the problems in Afghanistan without further bloodshed. The
countries that were represented at Venice were united in demanding
that Soviet troops had to be withdrawn from Afghanistan. This was
the message that Secretary Muskie had delivered to Foreign Minister
Gromyko,3 which Giscard had delivered to President Brezhnev, and
which Chancellor Schmidt would take to Moscow in the next few days.
They considered the Soviet action to be of great strategic importance
and a great concern to all of them. The United States was also deeply
concerned about the tone of terrorism, exemplified most vividly by
the capture of 53 United States diplomats, an act supported by the
Iranian Government. The United States was equally concerned about
the terrorist acts against Yugoslav personnel and facilities in the United
States. The President stressed that the Administration was determined
to bring the perpetrators of these terrorist acts to trial and would do
everything possible to prevent such acts in the future. (C)
Turning again to the international situation, President Carter
stressed his commitment to see detente improved and to continue to
seek better relations with the Soviet Union. He also emphasized his
commitment to the reduction and control of nuclear weapons. The
same spirit governed U.S. attitudes toward Iran. Once the hostages
had been released, the United States would appreciate Yugoslav assist-
ance in normalizing relations with Iran. The United States had no
quarrel with the Iranian people but only with the terrorists who were
illegally holding 53 U.S. diplomats. (C)
In closing, President Carter asked for President Mijatovic’s com-
ments on the matters he had raised and expressed his willingness to
answer any questions he might have. (U)
President Mijatovic began by noting that the Yugoslav leadership
was deeply interested in President Carter’s views and grateful for his
presentation. He stated that he wanted to discuss international prob-
lems from the Yugoslav point of view. Yugoslavia, he emphasized, was
deeply concerned about the deterioration of the international situation
which had occurred recently in all areas except Zimbabwe. Particularly
worrisome was the deterioration of relations between the U.S. and the
of the Austrian State Treaty.

Yugoslavia
Soviet Union and between the Soviet Union and China. In the Yugoslav
view, it was impossible to improve detente without an improvement in
these relationships. Tito had expressed this view and the new Yugoslav
leadership had reiterated it both to Brezhnev and to Hua Guofeng.
The leadership had the impression that both leaders shared their con-
cern but it was quite apparent that they had different views on how
the matters could be resolved. In the Yugoslav view, dialogue between
the major powers was important, if only to stop the current deteriora-
tion of relations. (C)
Turning to the situation in the non-aligned movement, President
Mijatovic said that although the situation today was not entirely compa-
rable with the situation in 1961 when the NAM extended its appeal to
the big powers to hold discussions, there were many similarities. Today
there was a similar danger of great power confrontation. The situation
required frankness. The Yugoslavs had the feeling that they could talk
to the United States frankly and openly, which was not the case with
some of their other partners. In their view, it was important to stand
aside from any attempt to involve other countries in great power con-
flicts, and they wished to abstain from any act that would complicate
problems. On the contrary, they believed they should try to improve
the situation. Patience was needed in order to preserve the spirit of
dialogue. This was the essence of Tito’s policy. Tito and all of the new
Yugoslav leadership recognized the changes introduced in interna-
tional politics in recent years by President Carter’s Administration and
regarded them positively. They expected the United States to persist
in this line, and their conviction had been reinforced by the President’s
arrival statement and by what he had said in this meeting. They very
much appreciated his views. (C)
Turning to the question of blocs, President Mijatovic said that
Yugoslavia’s position was well known but Yugoslavia was not a priori
against blocs. It evaluated the situation from the standpoint of non-
alignment—i.e. to what extent the policy of a particular country contrib-
uted to peace in the world. Yugoslavia did not build its relations at
the expense of other countries nor on their closeness of views. They
insisted on observance of this point. Yugoslavia did not and would
not give up that principle. The Yugoslav leadership, he stressed, very
much appreciated the fact that the United States accepted Yugoslavia
as it was and because it was as it was. (C)
Returning to the question of blocs, President Mijatovic posed a few
questions. What were President Carter’s expectations regarding future
U.S.-Soviet relations, SALT II and SALT III? He also wanted to know
President Carter’s view about the triangular relationship between the
United States, the Soviet Union and China and the Soviet contention
that China was a dangerous superpower. (C)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
President Carter replied that he had listened with interest to Presi-
dent Mijatovic’s presentation about the prospects for peace, which he
had characterized as disappointing. He had thought that the U.S. and
Soviet Union had been making good progress leading up to the meeting
with President Brezhnev in Vienna last year. He had believed, and
continued to believe, that SALT II was in the interest of the people of
the world. The American people had accepted the agreement with
approval and gratitude, and the Administration had been making good
progress toward the treaty’s ratification. The Senate Foreign Relations
Committee had approved the treaty without any amendments that
posed major problems. The Administration had cleared the Senate
calendar for the first part of the year so that it could devote top priority
to the ratification of the SALT agreement. The unexpected Soviet inva-
sion of Afghanistan, however, had greatly upset the American people
and dealt a severe blow to trust in the Soviet Union. With the invasion
of Afghanistan, it had been impossible to ratify the treaty. He wanted
to stress, however, that the United States was continuing to observe
the terms of the treaty and would continue to do so as long as the
Soviets did. (C)
Even without prior Soviet withdrawal from Afghanistan, the
United States was willing to discuss TNF with the Soviet Union, includ-
ing SS–20’s and was willing to discuss also issues such as SALT III.
Chancellor Schmidt would repeat the same message to the Soviets
next week when he went to Moscow. But the Soviets so far had been
unwilling to discuss TNF or SALT III. (C)
Continuing, President Carter emphasized that the United States rec-
ognized the clear danger to detente presented by any worsening of
U.S.-Soviet relations. He was determined that this would not happen.
But this did not mean we would accept the invasion as an accomplished
fact. We would do all we could to obtain the withdrawal of Soviet
Turning to China, the President noted that more than a year ago
the United States had normalized its relations with China. Since then,
relations had deepened; indeed they were better than the United States
anticipated they would be at this time. The President stressed that we
did not intend to use our relationship against the USSR and that we
would not sell weapons to the PRC. The United States had a long-
standing commitment to stability in Southeast Asia, and believed that
its new relationship with China would be a stabilizing factor in the
Responding to President Mijatovic’s question about the buildup
of China as a superpower, President Carter stated that the United States
did not see this as happening in the near future. China had no weapons
that could threaten Japan. As far as the United States could determine,

Yugoslavia
its land forces were aimed at the Soviet Union. China had made an
incursion into Vietnam, an action which the United States had opposed
and condemned. The United States shared the concern of many of the
nations regarding Vietnam’s occupation of Kampuchea. From Ankara,4
Secretary Muskie would go on to Kuala Lumpur to meet with the
ASEAN leaders to discuss the prospects for stability in Asia.5 This was
in line with the basic desire of the United States to see stability in Asia
and other areas strengthened. (C)
Turning to the Arab-Israeli dispute, the President said that the
Palestinian question and the question of Jerusalem had not yet been
resolved, and he could not predict when success would come. However,
the United States saw no alternative to the Camp David process which
would be acceptable to both parties involved. The United States would
continue to assist Egypt and Israel as long as they believed progress
could be achieved. If, however, this proved unfeasible, the United
States would be willing to join with other countries to look at other
alternatives. (C)
President Mijatovic thanked President Carter for his presentation. He
said that he could fairly say that the Yugoslav leadership was satisfied
with the viewpoints that President Carter had outlined and with his con-
structive efforts in the international area. Stating that he wished to elabo-
rate on some of the points which President Carter had mentioned, he
noted that the schedule would have to be expedited somewhat in order
to leave time for a discussion of bilateral relations. (C)
Turning first to the Middle East, he said that according to their
information, neither the efforts of the United States nor the efforts of
others had succeeded in solving the main problem of the Arab-Israeli
dispute: the Palestinian problem. President Tito had reiterated that
Yugoslavia supports any action which leads to progress toward resolv-
ing the Middle East crisis. Yugoslavia feared that the present stagnation
reduced any prospect for resolving the crisis. (C)
President Carter interjected that the United States would appreciate
any assistance which Yugoslavia could give in resolving the present
problems in the Middle East. (C)
President Mijatovic replied that in May 1948 in the United Nations
Yugoslavia had proposed the formation of a Palestinian state. If this
had been done, it was conceivable that there would be no Palestinian
problem today. Yugoslavia did not say that it was almighty or that the
NAM could solve everything. However, there was utility in working
jointly to try to resolve the problem and to look for solutions that

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
would bring the parties more closely together. Yugoslavia feared that
if the present stagnation persisted the policy of the Rejectionist Front6
would take a negative direction and find support on the other side.
This could lead to a very serious problem in a part of the world that
was very vulnerable. In Yugoslavia’s opinion, it would be worthwhile
if the United States showed patience in order to build up confidence
and trust within the Rejectionist Front. He suggested that the U.S.
should listen to the suggestions of the Rejectionist Front, at least as a
sort of gesture. At some point, this might pay off. (C)
President Carter replied that there were two key points to any resolu-
tion to the Arab-Israeli conflict:
—Commitment to Israel’s security and
—Resolution of Palestinian rights.
He noted that it would be helpful if the PLO would change its avowed
position on the destruction of Israel and accept UN Resolution 242.
Their failure to do this was an important obstacle to any settlement.
He again stressed that the United States would welcome and appreciate
any help Yugoslavia could give to help it improve relations with coun-
tries of the Rejectionist Front, especially Iraq. In this connection, he
mentioned Dr. Brzezinski’s visit to Algeria which had been aimed at
improving relations with that country.7 In conclusion, he noted that
U.S. and Yugoslav views coincided but that the PLO had to accept UN
Resolution 242. (C)
Foreign Minister Vrhovec interjected that Yugoslavia had already
discussed these matters with Iraq. In principle, Iraq was ready to nor-
malize relations but they posed some restrictions. He also noted that
President Qadhafi had recently contacted Yugoslavia and expressed
his interest in meeting with President Carter to resolve U.S.-Libyan
problems and had signaled his desire for a normalization of U.S.-Libyan
relations. (C)
President Mijatovic then turned to the question of Iran. He noted
that Yugoslavia didn’t agree with the holding of the hostages. The
leadership was aware that this was a sensitive problem for the Ameri-
can people and others, and they had made this clear to Iran. He stressed,
however, that actions which made Iran nervous could have the opposite
effect. The forces in Iran were not united and any action which increased
6 Front of the Palestinian Forces Rejecting Solutions of Surrender. The group formed
in 1974 and rejected the Palestinian Liberation Organization “Ten Point” Program
adopted that year, which called for the establishment of a Palestinian state over any
piece of Palestinian territory under PLO control.
Anniversary of the Algerian Revolution.

Yugoslavia
their nervousness could push Iran in the wrong direction and compel
it to lean more heavily on the other side. (C)
President Mijatovic then stated he wished to say a few words about
Afghanistan. There was no need to repeat Yugoslavia’s basic position
on Afghanistan, which was well known. Yugoslavia understood the
views and approach of the United States but felt both countries should
move in the same direction—toward a withdrawal of Soviet forces from
Afghanistan. Yugoslavia, he stressed, could never accept occupation of
Afghanistan. There was no way this could be justified on any grounds.
Yugoslavia had a very firm and principled view on this. (C)
The reestablishment of a genuine non-aligned and independent
Afghanistan was an essential element of Yugoslavia’s approach. This
included, however, withdrawal of Soviet troops. In recent months,
Yugoslavia had held consultations with the NAM on this question. It
felt that the NAM should consider this as well as other crises of instabil-
ity in the world. The meeting in New Delhi in January would have to
condemn all invasions, including Afghanistan. The Soviets knew this,
and this is why they were worried. (C)
President Carter interjected to ask Yugoslavia’s view on the Muslim
delegation and if they had any relations with the freedom fighters in
Afghanistan, who were struggling for self-determination. (C)
Turning to the second part of the President’s question first, Foreign
Minister Vrhovec stated that Yugoslavia did not have contacts with the
freedom fighters. Their knowledge was based on reports they received
through their Ambassador in Kabul. Based on these reports, their
impression was that the Soviets were having, and were likely to have
for some time to come, a difficult time in Afghanistan. (S)
Concerning the Committee of Three formed at the last Islamic
Conference, there was some concern about the size of the Committee
and whether or not the Committee should be broadened. It was impor-
tant that Algeria gave complete support to the second meeting. In this
regard, Foreign Minister Vrhovec noted that Yugoslavia had contact
with all the Ministers, including Ghotbzadeh, Foreign Minister of Iran.
The Yugoslavs believed that the orientation and approach of Pakistan
was sounder than Iran’s, and Yugoslavia had suggested that the Paki-
stanis should persist in their political initiatives. The Yugoslavs
believed that their constructive political action contributed to pressure
for the withdrawal of Soviet troops from Afghanistan. (S)
Turning to Iran, Mr. Kolisevski noted that Foreign Minister Vrhovec
had been in contact with Ghotbzadeh and that he himself had also
talked with Bani-Sadr in Algiers at the time that Dr. Brzezinski had
been there. He had gotten the impression at that time that the Iranians
wanted to solve the hostage issue but there was a problem of their
internal situation. The U.S. had been informed about Foreign Minister

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
Vrhovec’s discussions with Ghotbzadeh through its Ambassador. The
Yugoslavs had told Iran that they could not support the holding of the
hostages. (C)
President Mijatovic said he would like to make a point about disar-
mament. It was important to do something to halt the futile situation
regarding disarmament, and he felt it would be worthwhile to take an
initiative at Madrid. He also felt that a well prepared conference on
disarmament in Europe would be useful. He praised President Carter’s
readiness to observe the SALT II treaty, which he claimed would be
an important contribution to arms control. (C)
He then turned to a discussion of international economic relations
and expressed Yugoslavia’s disappointment at the current state of
North-South negotiations. In Yugoslavia’s view, this was one of the
reasons for the current economic situation. If this continued, conflicts
were bound to increase. Yugoslavia advocated the greatest possible
flexibility on the part of the developed and the developing countries,
even though there was a lack of equality. The Yugoslavs believed that
a more flexible attitude on the part of the United States would be of
immense importance. They recognized that it would not be possible
to make a radical change, but some new initiative was needed to
demonstrate forward progress and that the process was not totally
dead. In Yugoslavia’s view, U.S. prestige would be enhanced in the
NAM and the world at large by such an initiative. Such an initiative
would also have a positive influence on Eastern Europe. The Soviet
Union, he stressed, had an unreasonable attitude toward relations
between the developing and the developed world. (C)
President Carter replied that North-South relations had been a mat-
ter of considerable discussion in Venice. The heads of state represented
there had directed their Ministers to develop better ways and means
to aid the developing countries. The United States itself had undertaken
a number of measures in this regard, including reducing trade barriers
to imports from the developing world. The Soviet Union, however,
had done very little, except helping Cuba. Similarly, the OPEC countries
had done very little except with other Arab countries. The President
stressed his strong commitment to improve relations between the
developed and the developing world. In addition to what the countries
represented in Venice were already doing, they would make an intense
analysis of the situation in the coming months. (C)
President Carter then suggested that the discussions could be contin-
ued at the State dinner that evening and at the breakfast the next
morning, joking that he did not want his first action in Yugoslavia to
make all of the Yugoslav leadership late for lunch. (U)
President Mijatovic agreed, saying that they could reserve bilateral
relations for breakfast. (U)

Yugoslavia
As the meeting was about to break up, Mr. Kolisevski asked if it
would be possible to get satellite shots of mineral and water resources
in Yugoslavia, especially since the United States had given such photo-
graphs to Bulgaria. (U)
President Carter agreed, noting that he had given a book of photo-
graphs to President Tito during his visit in March 1978 and told him
that if he needed more, the United States could supply them. The
President said it would be easy for us to supply such photographs,
and we would be glad to do it. (U)
296.
Memorandum of Conversation1
SUBJECT
Breakfast Meeting
PARTICIPANTS
U.S.
The President
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski
Under Secretary David Newsom
Under Secretary Richard Cooper
Ambassador Lawrence Eagleburger
Steve Larrabee, NSC Staff Member
Victor Jackovich (Interpreter)
Yugoslavia
President Cvijetin Mijatovic
Lazar Kolisevski
Dragoslav Markovic
Veselin Djuranovic
Josip Vrhovec
Ambassador Budimir Loncar
Steven Doronski
Milos Minic
Mr. Djuranovic opened the meeting by asking the President if he
had had a good rest. (U)
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
The President replied yes. He said he hated to see his visit come to
an end. It would be nice to stay another week, but he had to get back
to work in Washington. (U)
The President then invited President Mijatovic to make a few
remarks. (U)
President Mijatovic, in turn, suggested that Mr. Djuranovic discuss
the economic situation. (U)
Mr. Djuranovic began by noting that Yugoslavia had had a very
dynamic economic development, with an average growth of over six
percent. This had been followed by serious economic problems, how-
ever. The domestic economy had become overheated and Yugoslavia’s
trade deficit had increased, as had its foreign debt. The increase in oil
prices had reinforced these difficulties. Yugoslavia would have to pay
$2.0 billion more this year than last year. All this had caused real
economic problems. The Yugoslavs had introduced a program of eco-
nomic stabilization. This was intended to bring down the growth rate,
which would be two percent lower this year. (C)
They had also introduced measures to reduce economic investment
and consumption. The Yugoslavs intended to undertake further meas-
ures toward stabilization such as the devaluation of the dinar. The
main task was to reduce the deficit to $2 billion; however, it was
necessary to have help from abroad to carry out this stabilization pro-
gram. That is why the Yugoslav government had been talking to Secre-
tary Miller and Mr. Rockefeller. The Yugoslavs had long experience
with Rockefeller, going back some 35 years and they wanted to continue
this favorable cooperation. (C)
Turning to the question of Mr. Rockefeller’s recent visit, Mr. Djura-
novic said that there had been two problems. Mr. Rockefeller had
wanted a consortium of world banks. However, this would make a
Yugoslav program of stabilization more difficult. The Yugoslavs
wanted credits exclusively from US banks. They recognized the rela-
tionship of the United States government to the private banks, but felt
that the government could still exert a certain favorable influence on
the banks. They had also discussed a second credit of $500 million next
year. This would help to continue the program of stabilization. In July
they looked forward to a meeting with Secretary Miller in Washing-
The President then invited Under Secretary Cooper to make com-
ments on the economic situation. (U)
Mr. Cooper said that he appreciated the problems associated with
the Yugoslavian economy. However, he pointed out that the Yugoslavs
had made considerable economic progress as well. He had discussed
with Minister Kostic his upcoming visit to Washington. Thus much of
this had already been discussed. (C)

Yugoslavia
The President said that when he returned to Washington he would
meet with Secretary Miller and ask him to pursue the question of
credits with Rockefeller and other bankers. He understood that one of
the problems had been a lack of dealing with the Central Bank, and
that Mr. Rockefeller would be sending one of his bankers to Belgrade
very soon. The President offered to do anything he could within the
bounds of US laws and customs to give the Yugoslavs assistance in
this matter. He asked if it would be helpful if he talked to Chancellor
Schmidt privately, and other European banks, or whether the Yugo-
slavs would prefer to handle this themselves. (C)
Mr. Djuranovic replied that Yugoslavs had already talked to the
Federal Republic, particularly to its finance minister. He himself would
be visiting the FRG soon and would appreciate US help in this mat-
The President then asked whether the Yugoslavs had any contact
with British and French banks. He offered to suggest to them that
they participate in any consortium if the Yugoslavs felt this would be
appropriate. He stressed this would be done on a confidential basis.
In this connection he stated that the United States regarded Yugoslavia
as a sound investment for the banks. Despite current difficulties the
US believed that Yugoslavia’s economic system was basically sound,
and that the banks would respond favorably. (C)
Mr. Djuranovic said that he would like to say some things frankly
and openly. He had the feeling that the banks needed more time in
order to gain confidence in Yugoslavia. The President’s visit had been
helpful in this regard. The Yugoslavs intended to continue with their
stabilization program, but the banks still had some reservations. He
noted, in this regard, that the Yugoslavs had already had contacts with
the French and British bankers and the response had been favorable. (C)
The President said it would be helpful to have Rockefeller’s financial
expert come to Belgrade and see the strength of the Yugoslav economy.
This would help to influence a positive response. (C)
Mr. Cooper added that all countries had problems with the increase
of the price of oil. He stressed that these countries had to break the link
between economic growth and dependence on oil. This was particularly
true for small and medium countries. (C)
The President noted that at Venice the countries represented had
discussed the reduction of the import of oil through conservation meas-
ures. The U.S., for instance, had reduced the import of oil in the first
six months by thirteen and a half percent and it would increase its
effort to save energy in every possible way. He offered to share any
U.S. experience and scientific developments to conserve energy. Some
countries, he noted, import as much oil as their exports. These countries
were in much worse condition than the U.S. or Yugoslavia. The problem

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
was a world-wide problem, except for the OPEC countries, and it was
getting worse. Summing up, he noted that the exchange had been
helpful in enabling the United States to understand Yugoslavia’s eco-
nomic problems and he promised to do everything he could to help
President Mijatovic said he would like to use the opportunity on
behalf of the presidency and for himself to express his appreciation
for President Carter’s understanding of Yugoslav policies, both bilateral
and international, and to thank him for his assistance on the Krsko
nuclear plant. (C)
The President said he understood the plant would be in business
by next year. [(U)?]
Ambassador Eagleburger replied that if it wasn’t, he would be ridden
out of town on a rail. (U)
The President jokingly said that he would hold Ambassador
Eagleburger personally responsible. (U)
President Mijatovic said he would also like to thank the President
for his help in taking action against the terrorists, whose activities
had been detrimental to the welfare of both the United States and
Yugoslavia. He also wanted to thank him for the earthquake assistance,
which was very important and which had been greatly appreciated. (C)
The President replied that he felt a sense of brotherhood with the
Yugoslavs and that we had much in common. The United States wanted
to see an economically, politically and militarily strong Yugoslavia and
it was in its own interest to help out. Making reference to Mt. St.
Helens,2 he said that he understood the tragedy of human event. (C)
Continuing, he said that it would be a great pleasure for him to
report that he was the first president to visit Yugoslavia after Tito’s
death. He would report what a strong government existed here and
the continuity that he had found; although, he pointed out, people
have little doubt about this. He had mentioned this in his toast, which
had been highly publicized around the world, but he promised to
confirm it with other leaders. (C)
President Mijatovic thanked him for these remarks. (U)
The President said that he was grateful that it was a fact. He added
that the United States had greatly benefited from Yugoslav help in Iran
and within the non-aligned movement. In these trying times Yugo-
slavia’s allegiance to non-alignment had been a great benefit to the
United States and to countries all over the world. (C)
St. Helens, an active volcano in Washington State. The subsequent eruption killed 57
people and caused widespread destruction over 230 square miles.

Yugoslavia
President Mijatovic replied that the Yugoslav side would inform the
countries of the non-aligned movement about their talks with President
Carter. He assured him that they would report frankly and that the
picture of the talks would be realistic. He also assured him that the
Yugoslavs would do everything to interpret the results as favorable to
their friends in the non-aligned movement, and that this would have
a positive impact on the views of the non-aligned countries. (C)
Turning to relations with the Soviet Union, President Mijatovic noted
some interesting new developments had taken place. There had been
a greater Soviet interest in contacts with Yugoslavia than in the past.
Their views and criticisms had not changed, especially regarding
Afghanistan and Kampuchea. In Belgrade, in talks with Doronski and
Kolisevski, the Soviets had emphasized how they respected the non-
aligned principles and non-interference. Yugoslavia had been very sat-
isfied with this. In this connection, President Mijatovic noted that he
had given an interview about the Belgrade communique which the
Soviets had published. This was interesting and new. In the past the
Soviets had not shown much interest in this. All these were positive
signs. In the future he thought the Soviets would take a deep interest
in Yugoslav affairs. (S)
The President replied that this was good but he warned the Yugo-
slavs to be cautious. (C)
Mr. Doronski remarked that the Yugoslavs had had a lot of bitter
experience with the Soviets, and they had had a lot of good experience.
This had tended to make them careful. On the whole, however, he
pointed out, cooperation was developing well. (S)
The President stressed that the best deterrent was a strong and a
united people. (C)
Mr. Brzezinski added, “and the balance of power”. (C)
President Mijatovic then said he would like to say something about
their experience with the Soviets. He wanted to be frank and did not
want to be misunderstood. The Yugoslavs were aware that the Soviets
had not given up their goal of bringing Yugoslavia into the bloc and
taking away their independence. Some such tendencies existed in the
West, too, he noted, but not in the case of the United States. Yugoslavia’s
policies, domestic and foreign, would remain the same, and Yugoslavia
would continue its non-aligned policy. (S)
Mr. Doronski added that Yugoslavia was simply carrying out Tito’s

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
297.
Memorandum From Stephen Larrabee of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, July 25, 1980
SUBJECT
Military Supply Relationship with Yugoslavia
Attached at Tab A2 is Harold Brown’s response to your memo of
July 7 which noted the dissatisfaction with the military supply relation-
ship expressed by Defense Minister Ljubicic to the President during
his trip to Belgrade3 and asked Brown for a status report of where
we stand. In the memo Brown argues that progress in our military
relationship over the last year has been “significant and solid” and
suggests that the main problem is the inability of the Yugoslavs to pay
for the equipment they want. He also notes that DoD is at work on a
package to provide the Yugoslavs with weapons in case of an “emer-
gency” (i.e., Soviet threat). (S)
Brown’s memo gives the impression all is well and that we basically
have little to worry about. This is not exactly the case. According to
Ambassador Eagleburger, who participated in the discussions at the
Joint Committee meeting in June,4 the question of the training samples
has become a political issue for the Yugoslavs, especially for Ljubicic
(hence his remarks to the President). The main problem has been the
question of leasing. DoD had originally offered to lease the Yugoslavs
the training samples for a period of 90–180 days (because DoD feared
that a longer lease would involve legal and legislative problems) and
then simply to renew the lease. However, the Yugoslavs have been
unhappy with this arrangement. They want assurances of continuity
and they see DoD’s unwillingness to enter into a long-term lease as a
weakening of US support for Yugoslavia. However, the Congress has
been just as adamant in its belief that leasing should not be used to
avoid congressional oversight of controversial sales, and the FY 82
with the recommendations. A copy was sent to Madeleine Albright.
2 Attached at Tab A is a July 19 memorandum from Brown to Brzezinski.
Vujatovic, and also referenced the comments made by Ljubicic to Carter at the June 24
at the U.S.-Yugoslav Joint Military Committee meeting in Belgrade June 17–18. (National

Yugoslavia
foreign assistance bill contains a provision that will tighten leasing
procedures. DoD is currently looking into ways to get around this
problem and now feels that it can offer a 2–3 year lease for support
equipment plus 5 TOW launchers that the Yugoslavs want. This would
help to alleviate Yugoslav concerns somewhat—although probably not
entirely. (S)
A second problem is the question of crisis support. At the Joint
Committee meeting in June there was an implicit assumption on the
part of the Yugoslavs that we would supply them with the weapons
they need in case of emergency. DoD is currently working on a paper
which will outline what we would be willing to offer the Yugoslavs—
and in what quantities—in case of an emergency. This paper will be
coordinated with the NSC and State and will be presented for discus-
sion and approval at an upcoming MBB. The paper should be ready
sometime next week. Once the paper has been approved, DoD proposes
that General Bowman, our military representative to the Quad, and
Bill Perry go to Belgrade in October to discuss with the Yugoslavs their
requirements. (TS)
Personally, I think this strategy makes sense. It would give the
Yugoslavs a sense of increased confidence that we are serious about
our willingness to support them without formally committing us to
anything. However, it would take us another step down the road in
our military supply relationship, and before we agreed to commit
ourselves to supplying the Yugoslavs with major quantities of weapons
in an emergency we would have to consult with Congress.5 (S)
5 On July 29, Brzezinski wrote at the top of the memorandum “Next concrete steps?”
Larrabee replied on July 31, stating that the next concrete step was discussing the paper
the Department of Defense was preparing on weapons systems the United States would
be willing to provide to Yugoslavia in case of an emergency. Following approval of the
paper, a U.S. delegation would be sent to Belgrade to discuss Yugoslav requirements.
Larrabee also stated that the NSC would “continue to monitor Defense-State deliberations
on the issue of long-term leases of US military items.” According to a notation on
Larrabee’s memorandum, Brzezinski saw it on August 1. (Carter Library, National Secu-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
298.
Letter From President Carter to Yugoslav President
Mijatovic1
Washington, August 13, 1980
Dear Mr. President:
During my visit to Belgrade in June we agreed that it would be
useful to continue the practice President Tito and I had of writing to
one another on subjects of common concern. I would like to start the
exchange with you by raising two issues of great importance for the
further development of East-West relations: Afghanistan, and the
deployment of long-range theater nuclear forces (LRTNF) in Europe.
Both of these issues affect the interests not only of the countries directly
involved, but of every country in the world.
Mr. President, I know of your own deep concern over the Afghan
situation, and I appreciate Yugoslavia’s independent efforts among
the nonaligned nations and hope they will continue. We support the
diplomatic efforts of the Islamic Conference Committee on Afghanistan
as the most productive approach to pursue at the moment, and will
be urging our friends and allies to exert continued pressure on Moscow
during this critical post-Olympic period.
I see little ground for optimism about the situation in Afghanistan.
The June 22 announcement of limited Soviet troop withdrawals appears
to have been simply an attempt to mislead. The Soviets redeployed
across their border a relatively small number of troops unsuited to the
type of military operations now being conducted in Afghanistan. The
overall effect of these troop movements has been to increase the effec-
tiveness of the Soviet combat presence in Afghanistan. The reorganized
Soviet forces are being used ruthlessly to put down the Afghan
national resistance.
Meanwhile, the Soviets continue to block any efforts to discuss a
political settlement by insisting on preconditions that would legitimize
the invasion and the present regime in Kabul and that would leave
open the central question of withdrawal. This Soviet recalcitrance is
Correspondence with Foreign Leaders File, Box 22, Yugoslavia: President Cvijetin Mija-
draft provided by the Department of State, to Carter on August 8. (Ibid.) According to
the log sheet, Carter signed the letter on August 20. The Department instructed the
Embassy in Belgrade to deliver the text of the letter to the Office of the President as
Central Foreign Policy File, D800405–1287) Eagleburger delivered the letter to Acting

Yugoslavia
as unacceptable to us as it is to our allies, to the Islamic Conference
and to most genuinely nonaligned countries. Chancellor Schmidt and
President Giscard have told us that the Soviets have been equally
inflexible on Afghanistan in dealing with them.
We continue to believe it is possible that the combination of contin-
ued international pressure and strong Afghan resistance may lead the
Soviets to conclude that a peaceful settlement based on complete with-
drawal is in their interest.
Yugoslavia has, quite understandably, taken a deep interest in the
issue of the deployment of long-range theater nuclear forces. I do not
need to recount the history of this issue, but I do want to inform you
of the latest developments in our efforts to initiate discussions on long-
range theater nuclear forces with the Soviet Union. Until recently,
the Soviets had refused to engage even in preliminary exchanges and
instead insisted that NATO should first revoke or suspend its TNF
modernization decision taken last December. However, on July 10,
the Soviets indicated to us that they had dropped this unacceptable
precondition, and we are now preparing to engage in serious prelimi-
nary discussions. While it is premature to conclude that the apparent
new Soviet willingness to discuss the issue indicates a genuine interest
in arms control measures involving TNF and based on the principle of
equality, we welcome the opportunity to sit down and discuss the issue.
Mr. President, the United States attaches great significance to the
preservation of the independence, unity and territorial integrity of
Yugoslavia. We want to see a politically stable and economically pros-
perous Yugoslavia—one that will continue to play an important role
internationally and within the Nonaligned Movement—and, as I
stressed during our meetings in June, we stand ready to do what we
can to help Yugoslavia achieve this goal. I discussed the Yugoslav
balance of payments situation with Secretary Miller shortly after my
return from Europe, and he and the Vice President subsequently met
with Federal Secretary Kostic in Washington.2 We hope that our efforts
2 At Mondale’s request, no memorandum of conversation was prepared for the
meeting with Kostic. In telegram 188947 to Belgrade, July 18, the Department reported
that Larrabee described the meeting as mostly symbolic and that Mondale assured Kostic
of U.S. Government willingness to help where possible. (National Archives, RG 59,
reported to the Embassy in Belgrade on July 22. The discussion focused on the tactics
that the Yugoslav Government might employ to reconcile its desire for a series of bilateral
agreements with Western governments with the suggestion of Chase Manhattan Bank
that they proceed with a worldwide syndication loan. Miller stressed that he did not
have any authority to direct private banks to do anything, and recommended that the
Yugoslav Government proceed with bilateral agreements in those countries that are
willing to do so and accept a worldwide syndication for the rest. (Telegram 192951 to

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
with the U.S. banking community on your behalf will help you to meet
your immediate financial needs.
In closing, I would like to express once again my deep satisfaction
with the substance and the atmosphere of my recent visit to Belgrade.
I feel the visit significantly contributed to the strengthening of bilateral
relations, and I look forward to working closely with you in the months
ahead to further deepen cooperation between our two countries.3
Sincerely,
Jimmy Carter
3 In a meeting with Vest on October 17, Loncar delivered Mijatovic’s response to
Carter’s letter. Mijatovic discussed Yugoslavia’s economic stabilization program, stress-
ing the Yugoslav Government’s hope for continued administration support on the matter.
He also addressed the outbreak of the Iran-Iraq War, CSCE, and the UN Special Session
of the General Assembly on Development. When delivering the letter, Loncar stressed the
Yugoslav desire to continue the letter exchanges between the two Presidents. (Telegram
299.
Telegram From Secretary of State Muskie to the Department
of State1
Secto 8014. Subject: (U) Secretary’s Bilateral With Yugoslavian
Foreign Minister Vrhovec.
1. Confidential-entire text
2. Summary: Yugoslavian Foreign Minister Vrhovec met for an
hour with Secretary Muskie and continued the conversation for an
additional 40 minutes with Under Secretaries Newsom and Nimetz
after Secretary Muskie left to attend UNSC meeting. The conversation
covered the full range of current international issues, as well as the
Confidential; Immediate; Exdis. Also sent to Belgrade. Sent for information Immediate
to Moscow, Warsaw, USUN, Baghdad, and Havana. Muskie was in New York to attend
the opening of the 35th Session of the UNGA.

Yugoslavia
Yugoslav economic situation, the Markotic case, and Assistant Secre-
tary Derian’s testimony on human rights. End summary.
23. U.S. attendees were the Secretary, Under Secretary Newsom, Under
Secretary Nimetz, and Deputy Assistant Secretary Barry. Yugoslav
attendees were Foreign Minister Vrhovec, Ambassador to the U.S.
Loncar, Ambassador to the UN Komatina, and Vrhovec’s Chef de
Cabinet.
4. Secretary Muskie opened the conversation by expressing regret
that he had not been able to accompany the President to Yugoslavia in
June. Vrhovec commented that the President’s visit had been extremely
successful, particularly because of the President’s statements while in
Yugoslavia. He noted that Pravda had commented critically on what
the President had said, but that a “very high Eastern European official”
had recently asked Vrhovec for a Yugoslav assessment of the visit.
When Vrhovec responded that the Yugoslavs considered the visit con-
tributed to detente, the “EE official” said that he had thought so too
but had wanted to hear this directly from the Yugoslavs.
5. U.S.-Soviet relations. The Secretary and Vrhovec discussed the
Gromyko UNGA speech which Muskie described as defensive. Vrho-
vec said that while the speech had been tough, it was also businesslike
and kept doors open. Muskie commented that Gromyko had very little
to say on Afghanistan and seemed to be trying to indicate that events
there had nothing to do with U.S. and Western attitudes toward the
USSR. This clearly does not represent the serious view of the Soviet
leadership but we can not tell whether they consider that they made a
mistake in Afghanistan by underestimating Western reactions. Muskie
said that in his discussions with Gromyko in Vienna and correspond-
ence since then Gromyko has shown no flexibility but has not been
hostile or abrasive. The Soviets may be looking for an open door, but
they clearly don’t know where it is. Vrhovec opined that the Soviets
may actually be ready to talk about a way to get out of Afghanistan,
but it was not reflected in Gromyko’s speech. It could be that the
Soviet’s are prepared to talk business with the U.S., but at times like
that they always play their cards very close to their chest and display
a more rigid public image than usual.
6. Iraq-Iran. In response to the Secretary’s query about a non-
aligned role in Iraq-Iran hostilities,2 Vrhovec suggested that neither
side would ask for NAM assistance until it became clear that one side
or the other was prevailing militarily. On the question of motivations,
which ended August 2, 1988.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
Iraq believed that Iran’s military weakness provided an opportunity
to humiliate Khomeini and destroy the Iranian Government. Iran simi-
larly is bent on undermining the Iraqi Government. Thus, both parties
to the conflict have far-reaching goals. Vrhovec said that Yugoslavia
had tried to open sensitive communications with the parties to see if
they could be calmed down, but both were unpredictable. Secretary
Muskie said that with the threat of blocking the Straits of Hormuz and
blocking shipping in and out, the international community could not
afford to lose time in ending the hostilities.
7. UN initiatives on Afghanistan. Under Secretary Newsom asked
what Yugoslavia knew about possible UN initiatives on Afghanistan.
Vrhovec said he had talked to Agha Shahi yesterday, and it was hard
to see what could be achieved. Shahi was consulting on his initiative
concerning an international conference which would focus on Soviet
withdrawal and efforts to calm the situation. However, the “other
side” had another resolution in its pocket designed to undo the Shahi
proposal. To have two competing resolutions would be a bad thing.
In Yugoslavia’s view it would be good to get a consensus resolution
to resolve the problem but not to see rival ideas put forward.
8. Yugoslavia economic situation. As Secretary Muskie was about
to leave for a UNSC meeting, he told Vrhovec that he and the President
were deeply interested in Yugoslavia’s efforts to deal with its economic
problems and anxious to be as helpful as possible. Muskie pointed out
that the President has expressed this interest before in Belgrade and
maintained it today, and that public opinion supported U.S. efforts in
this regard. He invited Vrhovec to convey the Yugoslav position on
this, on the situation in Poland, and on other matters of concern to
Under Secretary Newsom, who would report to him on the remainder
of the discussion. Vrhovec, who was clearly not up to date on the
current state of Yugoslavia’s efforts to obtain financing, began by stress-
ing that a Western bail-out was politically unacceptable to Yugoslavia.
Thus, they sought middle ground between the purely bilateral
approach they favored and the global syndication which had been
pressed on them by Chase. Ambassador Loncar pointed out that this
conceptual problem had been resolved through Yugoslavia’s two-track
approach, and that the main questions now were to be certain that
the syndication in which U.S. bankers participated produced enough
money to meet Yugoslavia’s expectations and that the negotiations be
concluded as rapidly as possible.
9. Poland. Vrhovec pointed out that the U.S. approach to the situa-
tion in Poland had been a sensitive one. Events there represented a very
serious development, unfavorable to the USSR. Yugoslavia regarded
developments so far as positive, proving that a way of life imposed
from outside was intolerable over time. Vrhovec noted that so far the

Yugoslavia
Soviets had been restrained in their behavior and their propaganda.
The fact that events in Poland had not turned into an East-West confron-
tation had contributed to a positive evolution in Poland. Yugoslav
PermRep Komatina chimed in to point out that a very important East
European official had recently commented that what had happened in
Poland was incompatible with Marxism/Leninism, but that it was
hoped that these new developments would “melt” as the economic
situation improved.
10. Markotic case.3 Under Secretary Newsom brought up the Mar-
kotic case in the name of the Secretary, urging that the Yugoslavs find
a solution to this problem compatible with our good political relations.
Vrhovec reacted without emotion and said he wished devoutly that
Markotic had never come to Yugoslavia. He pointed out that he had
been forced to “engage” the Yugoslav leadership to get information
on this case. While the sentence they handed out was severe, it was
understandable. Vrhovec pointed out that while the sentence was
within the framework of Yugoslav law, the authorities had interpreted
the law as harshly as possible. The case had not yet reached its final
stage, and he hoped the higher courts would take a different approach.
Newsom said we did not want to interfere in Yugoslav law, but that
given the number of Americans who also held Yugoslavian citizenship,
he hoped for a resolution which would not interrupt the movement
of people back and forth, and would recognize American interest in
this type of case and consider leniency.
3 Mirko Markotic was a naturalized U.S. citizen of Yugoslav (Croatian) descent. He
traveled to Yugoslavia in May 1980 and was arrested immediately after his arrival.
The Yugoslav Government tried and sentenced him to jail time for “anti-government
activities,” and refused to allow U.S. officials visitation rights, arguing that Markotic
was a Yugoslav citizen. On September 1, Eagleburger wrote that Washington “must
exact a price, even though to do so will certainly affect the course of what has been
over the past three years an increasingly warm and cooperative bilateral relationship.”
However, Eagleburger cautioned, the United States should not allow the Markotic case
to affect Washington’s attitude toward assisting Yugoslavia with its balance of payments
granted amnesty to Markotic “in consideration of the excellent overall state of our

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
11. Derian testimony.4 Ambassador Loncar raised a point about
which he said he had not had an opportunity to brief Vrhovec in
detail. He objected to the inclusion of Yugoslavia in Assistant Secretary
Derian’s testimony on human rights in Eastern Europe, to some of the
specifics in the statement, and to the fact that the statement was circu-
lated by the U.S. Embassy in Yugoslavia. Mr. Newsom stressed there
had been no change in U.S. policies toward Yugoslavia and pointed
out that our policy had been clearly and authoritatively enunciated by
the President and the Secretary of State.
12. Global negotiations. Vrhovec asked Newsom if he saw any
possibility of a breakthrough in negotiations at the UN. Newsom
pointed out that Ambassador McHenry believed that a solution could
be found once the overheated atmosphere of the Special Session cooled
off. Newsom pointed out that the U.S. could not agree to any formula-
tion which detracts from the authority of UN specialized agencies or
international financial institutions, especially in view of the difficulty
the U.S. was having in getting congressional funds for these institutions.
Vrhovec said that the Yugoslavs and others had hoped that a vague
formulation would enable the U.S. to agree since this would only result
in the beginning of talks at which all issues would be discussed in
detail again. Newsom pointed out that Washington agencies were not
prepared to accept vagueness of this kind and required recognition of
UN specialized agencies’ roles and independence. However, he said
that no one was more anxious than Ambassador McHenry to find a
solution to the problem.
Muskie
4 On September 16, Derian testified before the Subcommittee on International Orga-
nizations of the House Committee on Foreign Affairs on the status of human rights in
the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe. (Current Policy, No. 204, U.S. Department of State,
October 1980) Responding to a congressional inquiry, Derian included Yugoslavia in
the presentation, and discussed the Markotic case, eliciting a protest from the Yugoslav
Central Foreign Policy File, D800447–0459) While in West Berlin, Eagleburger wrote that
it was unwise to lump together Yugoslavia with the other Warsaw Pact countries as
doing so does not serve U.S. foreign policy. “We are dealing with an uncertain and
therefore neuralgic post-Tito leadership,” he cautioned, and “how we handle that fact
can have a substantial impact on the future of our bilateral relations.” (Telegram 1996
from West Berlin, September 17; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
D800444–0096) Hoping to resolve the issue prior to the Muskie-Vrhovec bilateral, the
Department instructed the Embassy to deliver the U.S. response, emphasizing that the
administration “make a very clear and fundamental distinction between nonaligned
Yugoslavia and the countries of the Warsaw Pact” and stress that there was no change
in U.S. policy toward Yugoslavia. (Telegram 251422 to Belgrade, September 20; National
U.S. response to the Foreign Ministry on September 22.

Yugoslavia
300.
Telegram From the Embassy in Yugoslavia to the
Department of State1
9712. Department for Under Secretary Newsom and Assistant Sec-
retary Vest. OSD/ISA for Assistant Secretary McGiffert. Subj: Contin-
gency Planning for Yugoslavia in the Event of Soviet Intervention
in Poland.
1. (S) Entire text.
2. In the event of Soviet military intervention in Poland and the
inevitable European security crisis this would generate, the Yugoslav
leadership—although seeking to avoid “provoking” Moscow—will
nevertheless welcome assurances of Western, specifically US, support.
They may also seek concrete assistance in the economic and/or military
area. This message outlines, in the event of Soviet intervention in
Poland, what our objectives should be in dealing with the Yugoslavs;
and what we may anticipate the GOY may ask of us. Circumstances
will of course govern what they and we say and do, but these initial
thoughts are provided as a basis for Department planning.
3. U.S. objectives: Our actions should reassure the Yugoslav leaders
that we are prepared to support them—within reason—should they
wish it; and provide early warning to the Soviets, lest in the turmoil and
fear generated by intervention in Poland they be tempted—unlikely
as that may be—to regard post-Tito Yugoslavia as equally beyond the
reach of Western assistance.
4. Where we could relatively easily predict how Tito would react
to a Polish invasion, we are less certain about the new leadership. They
will be wholeheartedly opposed to the Soviet move, but they will also
be scared and, initially at least, very cautious. A firm indication of
support from the US, early on, could have an immediate steadying
effect, and over the longer run, could influence GOY attitudes toward
the US. In any event, how they react will influence what we do. We
may find some actions on our part advisable before we have a chance
to consult with them. But consultations should take place promptly.
If 1968 is any guide, even if we do not make the first approach the
GOY may. In our opinion, making the first move ourselves would be
smart—letting the pace thereafter be partly set by the Yugoslavs but
Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Sent for information Priority to DOD/OSD/ISA, USNATO,
USDOCOSOUTH Naples, USCINCEUR, USCINUSAFE, and USNMRSHAPE. The tele-
gram was sent at a time when the domestic situation in Poland was deteriorating fast
and a Soviet invasion of Poland seemed imminent. See Document 42.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
with us in a position, if need be, to hold their expectations within limits
of the possible.
5. Unilateral steps which we ought to consider include:
—A restatement by the Carter administration, at no lower level than
the Secretary of State, of US support for Yugoslavia’s independence,
territorial integrity, and unity;
—A statement confirming continuity in this policy from a senior
figure in the incoming Reagan administration, preferably Mr. Bush or
the President-elect himself, but at no lower level than the Secretary-
designate;
—A similar statement in the NATO context, by SYG Luns, might
also be wise, particularly as a warning to the Soviets. But in Yugoslav
eyes it would probably be regarded as more “provocative” than bilat-
eral statements by Western powers.
6. Our statements should be measured, not too strident. We must
not be seen to be contributing to heightened uncertainty about Yugo-
slavia’s future. A simple, straightforward reiteration of US support in
the usual formulation, if made at the right moment and in a broader
context, should accomplish our objective.
7. Joint steps: We may well find the Yugoslavs receptive to a visit
by a senior US official (whether the President-elect should be repre-
sented in some way is beyond our ken). Such a visit would be described
(properly) as consultations. The US visitor should neither be seen as
a prelude to a US effort to “envelope” the Yugoslavs, nor should his
presence be construed by the Yugoslavs as presaging a USG blank
check. Some initial thoughts follow on what might be on the agenda
during such consultations:
—An exchange of views on the situation in Europe, Soviet inten-
tions, Western reactions, etc.
—In this context, we might offer to establish a joint exchange of
intelligence with the GOY on the situation in Poland and Eastern
Europe.
—The Yugoslav military may well seek to use the occasion to obtain
further support, i.e., a speed-up of delivery of items already in the
pipeline or under negotiation and/or more forthcoming responses to
requests for state-of-the-art weapons and equipment. (Para 7 below
describes what they could be looking for.)
—If a crisis in Poland occurs before the current balance of payments
loan negotiations are completed, the GOY would wish to lock those
resources in as fast as possible and might again approach us for assist-
ance in this regard.
—It is also possible, depending on the circumstances, that the GOY,
aware of the Polish request for substantial direct economic assistance

Yugoslavia
from the US and also aware that this has not been publicly rejected in
Washington, might also make a similar pitch. What we can do under
existing legislation is sharply limited. What the Yugoslavs might ask
of us could exceed those limits, but we should not be surprised should
they approach us. Any Yugoslav request for direct financial assistance
might be tied, directly or indirectly, to their military needs. For example,
GOY hesitancy about FMS credits for military purchases might vanish.
8. The following is a list of US weapons, equipment and training
that would most likely be found on a Yugoslav wish list. Rank order
does not imply order of priority:
A) AN/TPS–63 radars. An FMS contract was signed earlier this
year for the purchase of eight AN/TPS–63 radars. Delivery is currently
scheduled to commence in June 1982. The Yugoslavs could seek ear-
lier delivery.
B) F–5 aircraft. The Yugoslavs have expressed considerable interest
in this aircraft. They would quite possibly ask the USAF to train pilots
in the F–5, even though it is not yet in the YAF inventory. They might
also propose to purchase a number of the planes.
C) TOW/Dragon. The US Army is currently preparing FMS cases
for small quantities of TOW/Dragons to use for training purposes. The
GOY might ask for accelerated delivery of these anti-tank weapons
and additional urgent training.
D) Reconnaissance/EW equipment. Commercial contracts are cur-
rently being prepared for surveillance and countermeasures equip-
ment. The Yugoslavs might seek accelerated delivery.
E) Mark–46 torpedoes. LOA’s for the Mark–46 have been delivered.
The Yugoslavs might seek to accelerate acquisition.
F) Another priority would probably be AGM–65 A/B Maverick,
150 of which the GOY is seeking to buy. Congressional notification is
being prepared. They might well seek to accelerate the acquisition
process.
9. The GOY may also push us for some thing we have so far
refused (Harpoon). We would, in the abstract, see no reason to reverse
previous denials.
10. Deployment of units of the US Sixth Fleet for operations in the
Adriatic and/or a highly visible ship visit should be considered as an
option to demonstrate US strength and purpose. However, the GOY
might find these in the “provocative” category and we should therefore
not undertake such deployment without careful consideration of the
pros and cons. The ship visit would require consultations; an opera-
tional deployment should at least be informally discussed with the
Yugoslavs in advance unless there are overriding operational reasons
not to do so.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
11. The above is not an inclusive list—there may be other steps
worth thinking about. The point is, we ought to have thought through,
to the extent we can, how in the event of catastrophe in Poland we
should deal with the one country in the area most likely to be shaken
and most likely to be looking for reassurance—and one country where
what we say (and are ultimately prepared to do) can make a difference.
Eagleburger
301.
Telegram From the Embassy in Yugoslavia to the
Department of State1
410. USDOCOSOUTH for INTAF, USCINCEUR for Polad, CINCU-
SAFE for Polad, USNMR SHAPE pass Stoddart SACEUR/SA. Subj:
The Post-Tito Transition: An Appraisal at Year’s End. Refs: (A) 80
1. (C)-entire text.
2. This message transmits the summary and conclusions of an
airgram attempting an analysis of the internal situation in Yugoslavia
eight months after the death of Tito.
Confidential; Priority. Sent for information Priority to Ankara, Athens, East Berlin, Bucha-
rest, Budapest, Moscow, Prague, Rome, Sofia, Vienna, Warsaw, West Berlin, USNATO,
USUN, USDOCOSOUTH Naples, USCINCEUR, CINCUSAFE, and USNMRSHAPE.
of the transition in Yugoslavia three months after Tito’s death. The Embassy concluded
that “the leadership has maintained its outward cohesion and unity,” “the serious eco-
nomic situation is being addressed,” “the political-security situation has remained gener-
ally stable,” “Yugoslavia’s diplomacy has been steady and exceptionally active,” and
“the U.S. role in promoting a smooth transition by making clear our friendship and
support for Yugoslavia remains as important as ever” despite possible challenges down
situation in post-Tito Croatia and Slovenia. “The leaders of these two Republics” the
Consulate reported, “are focusing very largely on the problems of stabilization” and are
paying close attention to any signs of disaffection or “especially in Croatia—for any
signs of a stirring of latent nationalism.” The Consulate concluded: “So far as we can
determine the general mood remains quiet.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
Policy File, D800566–0973)
4 Not found.

Yugoslavia
3. Last July, three months after Tito’s death, we concluded that the
transition was proceeding as expected, that is, fairly smoothly. The
collective leadership, while hardly brilliant or decisive, was functioning
satisfactorily and maintaining outward unity; the political-security situ-
ation remained generally stable, despite certain pressures to liberalize
and some consequent calls for internal vigilance; Yugoslavia’s serious
economic problems were being addressed, albeit with inadequate
results to date; and Yugoslavia’s traditional foreign policy priorities
remained unaltered—preservation of independence through heavy
commitment to non-alignment, stability and balance in dealing with
Moscow and Washington, and as good relations as possible with its
neighbors.
4. Today, more than eight months after Tito’s death, these judg-
ments remain valid. The situation, however, is anything but static.
Indeed, pressures are building—particularly from the troubled econ-
omy—which are forcing the pace of change and open debate, posing
difficult choices for the collective leadership, and highlighting the issue
of where real power should reside in post-Tito Yugoslavia. Among
these pressures are:
—The further deterioration of the international situation. When
Tito died, Soviet-backed aggression in SE Asia, turmoil in Iran, the
Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, and the near paralysis of the Non-
Aligned Movement were already weighing heavily on the new Yugo-
slav leadership.5 Since then, the Gulf War, Poland, the threatened col-
lapse of detente, and increased energy and trade dependence on Mos-
cow have put new pressures on the leadership—underscoring
Yugoslavia’s heavy commitment to the NAM, and forcing difficult
(and no doubt internally contentious) trade-offs between foreign policy
principles, smooth relations with Moscow, and the self-interest in pre-
serving socialism.
—Continuing economic difficulties. The economic chickens of Tito-
era economics are now coming home to roost and the new leadership
is having to foot the bill. The economy, beset by inflation, declining
living standards, imbalanced trade, low productivity, and chronic
unemployment, thus remains the make-or-break issue for the new
to Eagleburger that the international political situation was most dangerous, and that
the relationship between Washington and Moscow was “absolutely critical.” (National
Belgrade, Eagleburger also met with Vrhovec and with Mijatovic to discuss the state of
U.S.-Yugoslav relations and the international situation. (Telegram 406 from Belgrade,
Policy File, D810030–0945)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
leadership, a test of political stability, and a driving force for change
throughout society. No longer able to coast along on the momentum
of past policies, assumptions, successes, or foreign borrowing, the lead-
ership is having to face the hard and politically controversial economic
facts of life. And that has meant admitting the need for austerity,
structural change, and more open discussion of the roots of and reme-
dies for present economic ills. This in turn has focused attention on
etatist political and economic interests, the Party’s relevance to solving
the country’s economic problems, and reformist pressures for a shift
of economic decision-making authority upward to the Federal authori-
ties at the macro-economic level and at the same time, outward from
the Republics to individual enterprises.
—The quickening of domestic political life. The need to define new
power relationships following Tito’s death would in any case have led
to an intensification of political life in Yugoslavia, but the urgency of
its economic problems and the lessons of Poland have pushed this
process further and faster than one might earlier have anticipated.
Individual, institutional, and social actors are scrambling to protect or
enlarge their piece of the political and economic action as well as to
define the future. In the process, a new critical spirit has emerged in
all major areas of Yugoslav life. Thus, since Tito’s death, the political
landscape has been enlivened by open debate on economic policies,
criticism of past leadership errors, calls for more open decision-making,
attacks on corruption and mismanagement, petitions for greater politi-
cal and literary freedom, pressures for reform, and increase assertive-
ness in the press and cultural field.
5. In short, two broad but closely related debates—one economic,
the other political—have emerged between “reformers” who accept
the need for change and “conservatives” who fear it. On the economic
side, the issue is how to respond to economic challenges and to rational-
ize economic decision-making without undermining existing autho-
rity, self-management concepts, and the delicate ethnic and Federal-
Republican power balance. Whether and how to avoid excessive trade
dependence on the East is a further issue of growing concern. On the
political side, the issue is where to draw the line between constructive
and hostile criticism and whether the emerging debate can best be
controlled through repression or through participation in it.
6. For now, the “reformers,” centered primarily in the State appara-
tus, the technical intelligentsia, and academic clearly have the advan-
tages.6 They have pushed through an economic program based on
meeting with
Federal Assembly
President Dragoslav
Markovic. Markovic told
Eagleburger that the Yugoslav Government was “determined to press ahead with a
democratization of society and to improve economic efficiency.” (National Archives, RG

Yugoslavia
greater reliance on market mechanisms and less meddling by local
political interests in investment decisions; left an ambivalent LCY with
little alternative other than to endorse this approach at the December
15th CC LCY plenum and to accept more open debate and criticism
as necessary and healthy; and argued with apparent success for a policy
of differentiation between a “loyal” and a “disloyal” opposition. With
events on their side, the “reformers” have thus emerged on the offensive
and the State apparatus has proven itself more effective than the Party
in developing coherent and convincing responses to the powerful and
broadly based currents for change.
7. The battle is hardly over, though, and the “conservatives”—a
mixture of generally older, more orthodox elements in the Party hier-
archy as well as local and Republican elements motivated more by
pragmatic considerations of power than by ideology—can be expected
to fight back hard. Thus, these conservatives, with LCY Presidency
members Dragosavac and Mikulic in the fore, have consistently pressed
for a tougher line against “dissidents” and have continued to issue
periodic warnings about dangerous “new tendencies,” attempts to
change “fundamentals of the (Titoist) system,” ideological backsliding,
and reliance on “bourgeois” economic methods.
8. These same forces no doubt were also instrumental in getting
the December Plenum to take a stand—calling for “uncompromising
rejections” of anti-Socialist and anti-self-management trends—on a
process which seemed bent on moving ahead with or without Party
consent. Whether this attempt to reassert Party control over the debate
will have the desired effect remains to be seen, since the real issue—
where to draw the line between acceptable and unacceptable “reform-
ist” criticism—was not clarified. In any case, since the Plenum, Party
organs have noticeably stepped up public criticism of opposition ele-
ments (Djilas, Mihaljov, and the backers of “Javnost”—proposed maga-
zine of social criticism); the Party faithful have been exhorted to struggle
harder against ideologically alien ideas and those who ascribe all pres-
ent economic ills to the self-management system; and there have been
attempts to intimidate the signers of the various petitions for greater
political freedom (without, however, noticeable success so far).
9. In a way, the emerging atmosphere of criticism and debate is remi-
niscent of the political-intellectual ferment of 1970–71 in Yugoslavia—
but without the acute nationalistic content present then—but also with-
out Tito in the wings to ensure the debate is kept within bounds. This
process has not yet gone very far and the outcome is not all clear. For
now, the debate remains relatively restrained, responsible, and focused
on reform, “democratization,” and “liberalization” within the Socialist
self-management system.Itsmainprotagonists havebeen inthe political
mainstream rather than the fringe forces which seek to destroy Tito’s

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
“self-management socialism” or to alter it beyond recognition remain
scatteredandtheirprograms—wheretheyhaveformulatedthem—have
yet to find much resonance in society at large. This has obviated the need
for more heavy-handed repressive measures.
10. From this we draw several conclusions:
—The level of turbulence in the post-Tito period has been well
within the tolerable, although the opening up of the political process
has proceeded faster than expected.
—The leadership, despite some dissenting voices and a foot-drag-
ging party, has turned in a credible if somewhat uneven performance,
forcing through necessary inter-Republican compromises and on bal-
ance responding to pressures for change and to economic necessity
with cautious flexibility and even political courage.
—The trend toward more open criticism, debate, and decision-
making—in one sense a step toward Karelj’s limited concept of the
“pluralism of self-management interests”—is fully consonant with the
generally liberalizing (and in our view healthy) thrust of Yugoslavia’s
post-war political and economic evolution. It has been animated and
legitimized not by Western-style Democrats or “closet” capitalists but
by pragmatic Communists who are interested more in problem-solving
than ideological abstractions, who believe the Party’s leading role is not
historically ordained but contingent on its ability to provide convincing
answers to current problems, who believe the Socialist system can and
should tolerate a much more open expression of differences, and who
see cautious adjustment to pressures for change less risky in the long
run than sterile resistance.
—The forces for change are too broadly based and too deeply
rooted to be checked easily. Other pressures aside, the generation now
coming into its own is a post-war generation less interested in ideology,
more pragmatic, better educated and travelled, less ambivalent about
Moscow, thoroughly imbued with a post-1948 spirit of proud inde-
pendence and more realistic about the nature and requirements of
Yugoslavia’s Federal system. Nothing illustrates this new climate more
clearly than the Party’s own assessment that it can only hope to main-
tain control over the on-going process by participating in it and endors-
ing more criticism and debate.
11. That said, there are developments which could alter the pragma-
tists’s and reformers’ present advantage. First, a prolonged economic
downturn or collapse could undermine this group’s confidence in its
ability to control the situation while strengthening conservative ele-
ments anxious to preserve power through a more “firm-hand” policy,
a quick economic “fix” (i.e., greater reliance on Eastern trade, markets,
and economic methods), and consequent abandonment in practice if
not in name of genuine non-alignment. So far there is no indication

Yugoslavia
that such a negative process is under way. The leadership understands
the gravity of the economic situation; has taken politically unpopular
steps to turn the situation around; and has had some initial if far from
adequate successes in this regards.
12. Second, a shift to a softer Soviet tactical line. Since Tito’s death,
the Soviets have waged something of a “friendship offensive” toward
Yugoslavia, generally holding their tongue in the face of Yugoslav
actions (as the December 12 GOY announcement on Poland) and press
coverage (as of Afghan events) which Moscow must find offensive.
Should Moscow revive the polemics the Yugoslav leaders would imme-
diately fear this would presage an attempt by Moscow to translate
Yugoslavia’s increased trade and energy vulnerability into political
gain. This fear of the potential consequences of growing trade with the
East has become a pervasive element in the GOY leader’s thinking.
For some, overt Soviet pressure, should it occur, could change the
calculation of the balance of risk and some fence-straddlers might
conclude that more accommodation and tighter internal controls pose
fewer risks than further political and economic experimentation.
13. Third, a degeneration of the present more open climate into a
nationalistic free-for-all or into a frontal attack on Party prerogatives
or power. Either development could well trigger a reaction from the
military, as in the 1971–72 “nationalist” crisis when the military strongly
urged (and enabled) Tito to crack down on a situation that seemed to
be getting out of control. Either a nationalist free-for-all or a too-far,
too-fast erosion of Party prerogatives could undercut those arguing
that post-Tito Yugoslavia can only find the right solutions, and public
support for them, through a process of more open debate, criticism,
and decision-making. This is the least clear area of all: the outcome
will hinge on the ability of contending groups to handle their differ-
ences during a period of economic sacrifice and international tension
with political maturity and good sense. So far the post-Tito record has
been encouraging on this score.
14. In short, some eight months after Tito’s death and a year after
his taking ill, Yugoslavia is entering 1981 with a more open political
climate, with its leadership and its commitment to Yugoslav independ-
ence and non-alignment intact, with its course set for continuity and
cautious change, and with some problems on the way to resolution
but many more to be worked out. Economic problems at home, tensions
abroad, and liberalizing pressures continue to weigh upon the leader-
ship, inching it toward a limited kind of pluralism, stirring conservative
counterpressures, and forcing the pace of change faster than many in
the leadership, and particularly in the Party, would like.
15. Thus, while the going will not be easy and the prospect is for
more rather than less political turbulence as power relationships are

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
sorted out, we believe that the economy will remain the single most
critical factor; that the less doctrinaire elements, who are clearly more
in tune with the economic operatives of change, the popular mood,
and the thrust of Yugoslavia’s post-war evolution, have the best chance
of providing the leadership and answers for Yugoslavia’s economic
problems; and that Yugoslavia, despite possible tightening up against
some of the more radical regime critics, is likely to remain on a course
of cautious, pragmatic and generally liberalizing change in the critical
period ahead.
Eagleburger

References are to document numbers
Aaron, David:
Aggrey, O. Rudolph—Continued
Romania—Continued
Czechoslovakia, 103, 115
Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and,
German Democratic Republic, 1 34
Hungary, 171
Soviet relations with, 212
World Bank/IMF loans, 234
Soviet propaganda broadcasting, 66
Albania, 30, 88
U.S. covert publications program, 2,
Albright, Raymond, 254
U.S. differentiated policy structure, 6,
Aleksandrov-Agentov, Andrei M., 282
Alekseyeva, Lyudmila, 8
U.S. international broadcasting
Allworth, Edward, 68
Amalrik, Andrey, 3, 8
Yugoslavia:
American Jewish Committee, 215, 217
Intelligence cooperation, 259
American Jewish community, 214, 215,
Mondale visit (1977), 236
Post-Tito contingency planning,
Amnesty International, 121, 234
U.S. economic aid, 265
Anderson, Jack, 69
U.S. economic cooperation with,
Andrei, Stefan:
Blumenthal visit, 211
Brzezinski meetings, 206, 208
U.S. trade with, 271
Abdul-Rauf, Muhammed, 68
Abshire, David, 47, 48
Export controls, 218
Aczel, Gyorgy, 146
Foreign policy, 203
Administration transition period
Iran hostage crisis, 219, 229
Most Favored Nation status, 185
Aggrey, O. Rudolph:
Norfolk port access, 218
Romania:
Arab-Israeli conflict, 287
Polish crisis (1980), 233
Blumenthal Romania visit, 211
Political situation, 194, 213
Carter-Ceausescu correspondence,
Ridgway meetings, 229
Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, 221,
Credentials presentation, 188
U.S. international broadcasting
Foreign policy, 203
program, 58
Horodinca defection case, 222
Iran hostage crisis and, 219
Vance visit proposals (1979), 219
Mondale-Burtica meetings, 226
Warsaw Pact PCC meeting, 211
Pacepa defection case, 207
World Bank/IMF loans, 234
Polish crisis (1980) and, 233
Andrews, Nicholas G.:
Political situation, 213
Bulgaria, 82
Rauta case, 195, 204
Czechoslovakia, 99
Ridgway-Andrei meetings, 229

Andrews, Nicholas G.—Continued
Bennigsen, Alexandre, 68
U.S. international broadcasting
Bergland, Robert, 202, 205
program, 53
Yugoslavia, 254
Bergsten, C. Fred, 6
Anghel, Petre, 184
Apro, Antal, 36
Berlinguer, Enrico, 243
Arab-Israeli conflict (see also Romania
Bernard, Noel, 58
and Arab-Israeli conflict):
Bernardic, Dragan, 244, 254
U.S.-Yugoslav discussions, 236, 244,
Besteliu, Ion, 214, 216
Biden, Joseph R., Jr., 158, 159
Arms control. See Strategic Arms
Biester, Edward, 47
Limitation (SALT) talks; UN
Bilak, Vasil, 108
Special Session on Disarmament.
Binder, David, 72, 77
Atherton, Alfred L. “Roy,” 188
Bingham, Jonathan B., 136, 158
Atkinson, Richard C., 13
Blackwill, Robert D., 93, 282
Austria, 105
Blech, Klaus, 55
Avram, Ion, 200, 204
Bloomfield, Lincoln, 37
Axen, Hermann, 125
Babalau, Constantin, 213
B’nai B’rith International, 214, 215
Babiuch, Edward, 38
Board for International Broadcasting
Bahro, Rudolf, 26, 133
(BIB). See U.S. international
broadcasting program.
Banlaki, Gyorgy, 166
Bobtodorova, Elena, 93
Barnes, Harry G., Jr., 179, 185
Bobu, Emil, 213
Barraclough, William, 164
Bogatyrev, Konstantin, 8
Barry, Robert:
Bulgaria, 94
Hungary, 173
Iran hostage crisis, 219
Bolger, William F., 129
Boorstin, Daniel, 82
Borg, C. Arthur, 4
Bowdler, William G., 17
Bartholomew, Reginald:
German Democratic Republic, 128
Bowman, Maj. Gen. Richard C., 258,
U.S. international broadcasting
program, 57, 61
Brandt, Willy, 120
U.S. policy toward Eastern Europe,
Brement, Marshall:
Bulgaria, 93
U.S. refugee assistance, 33
Dissident movements, 37
U.S.-Soviet relations, 21, 22
Eastern European political situations,
Yugoslavia, 277, 278
Bass, Kenneth, 70
German Democratic Republic, 132
Battle Act (Mutual Defense Assistance
Soviet propaganda broadcasting, 66
Control Act), 230
U.S. international broadcasting
Bednar, Jiri, 106
Begin, Menachem, 183, 184
Yugoslavia, 266, 268
Beil, Gerhard, 122, 124
Bremer, L. Paul, III, 218, 281
Brezhnev, Leonid:
Carter correspondence, 42
References are to document numbers

Brezhnev, Leonid—Continued
Brzezinski, Zbigniew K.—Continued
Jackson-Vanik Amendment waivers
Czechoslovakia, 108
extension, 165
Polish crisis (1980), 42
Polish crisis (1980), 42
Political situation, 35
Romania:
Romania, 205, 206
Andrei meetings, 206, 208
Soviet policy toward Eastern Europe,
Blumenthal visit, 210
Carter-Ceausescu correspondence,
Warsaw Pact PCC meeting, 210
Yugoslavia, 243, 282
Carter-Macovescu meetings, 187
Carter-Pungan meetings, 177
Brody, Clifford, 196, 202
Horodinca defection case, 222
Brown, Rear Adm. Taylor, 261
Most Favored Nation status, 180
Brown, Harold:
Pacepa defection case, 207
Export controls, 13
Political situation, 193
Helsinki Accords implementation, 10
Rauta case, 195, 202
U.S. covert publications program, 2
Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and,
U.S. differentiated policy structure, 6,
U.S. military sales proposals, 223,
U.S. policy review, 1
U.S. relief aid, 181
Soviet propaganda broadcasting, 65,
Browne, Monroe, 80
Brumberg, Abe, 17
U.S. covert publications program:
Brzezinski, Zbigniew K.:
CIA papers, 3
Bulgaria, 93, 94
Special Coordination Committee
Eastern European political situations,
discussions, 2
Turner memoranda, 28
Export controls, 12
U.S. international broadcasting
Presidential Review Memoranda,
Administration transition period
Romania, 204
German Democratic Republic, 128,
Board for International
Broadcasting tensions, 62
Helsinki Accords implementation, 10
Hungary:
Cherne memoranda, 76
Aaron-Nagy meetings, 171
Christopher memoranda, 53
Carter oral message, 159
Gronouski BIB chair appointment,
Hunter memoranda, 137
Holtzman investigation, 69
Hyland/Hunter memoranda, 140
Intelligence Information Special
King memoranda, 148, 157
Reports, 58
Oakar communications, 160
Reactions to return of, 152
Tarnoff memoranda, 146
Persian-language broadcasting, 61
Soviet jamming, 79
Grain diversion, 169, 170
Special Coordination Committee
Huszar meetings, 166
discussions, 70
Most Favored Nation status, 148,
U.S.-Federal Republic of Germany
discussions, 52, 54
References are to document numbers

Brzezinski, Zbigniew K.—Continued
Bulgaria—Continued
Foreign policy, 30, 95
U.S. international broadcasting
Most Favored Nation status:
program—Continued
Garthoff memoranda, 94
Voice of America expansion
State Department papers, 11
proposals, 63, 64
U.S.-Bulgarian discussions, 83, 88,
U.S. policy toward Eastern Europe:
King memoranda, 25
Vance memoranda, 89
Policy review, 1
Political situation, 81, 95
U.S. differentiated policy structure,
U.S. international broadcasting
program, 49, 67
U.S. refugee assistance, 31, 33
U.S. relations with:
Yugoslavia:
Brement/Larrabee-Gotsev
Belovski meetings, 238
meetings, 93
Carter-Kardelj meetings, 243, 244
Cultural agreement, 82, 83
Carter-Tito correspondence, 239
Fishing quotas, 91
Garthoff-Gotsev discussions, 91
Intelligence cooperation, 259
Garthoff memoranda, 94
Military cooperation, 270, 291
Herz memoranda, 85
Military transfers to Ethiopia, 237,
Iran hostage crisis and, 36
Perry memoranda, 95
Overflight issues, 251
Polish crisis (1980) and, 44
Post-Tito contingency planning,
Presidential Directives, 83
Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and,
Science/technology cooperation,
State Department papers, 11
Tito condolences, 289
Tito funeral delegation, 279, 280,
U.S. differentiated policy structure
Vance-Mladenov meeting
proposals, 84, 87
U.S. economic cooperation with,
Vance-Zhivkova meetings, 92
Zhivkova U.S. visit (1977), 82
U.S. military sales, 242, 243
Yugoslav relations with, 88, 246
Duncan memoranda, 241
Bureau of Intelligence and Research
Eagleburger memoranda, 286
reports:
Hunter memoranda, 257
No. 843, “Ceausescu’s Leadership
Kimmitt/Brement/Larrabee
Position,” 182
memoranda, 266
No. 954, “The Prospects for Domestic
Larrabee memoranda, 268, 285,
Stability in the GDR,” 121
No. 1238, “East Germany’s New
Tarnoff memoranda, 240
Hard Line,” 133
U.S. nuclear exports, 247, 251
No. 1429, “The Human Rights
Buell, Bill, 62
Movement in Czechoslovakia,”
Bulgaria:
Burg, Steven, 68
Albanian relations with, 88
Dissident movements, 5, 86
Byrne, Malcolm, 42
Economic situation, 95
Caddell, Pat, 153
References are to document numbers

Carter, Jimmy—Continued
Carrillo, Santiago, 243
U.S. international broadcasting
Carter, Hodding, III, 112
program—Continued
Carter, Jimmy:
Brezhnev correspondence, 42
Persian-language broadcasting, 61
Bulgaria, 82
Soviet jamming, 79
Czechoslovakia, 98, 100
U.S.-German Federal Republic
Dissident movements, 5, 37
discussions, 52
Documents not declassified, 24
U.S. policy review, 1
Eastern European political situations,
U.S. refugee assistance, 31, 33
German Democratic Republic, 52, 134
Yugoslavia:
Hungary:
Kardelj meetings, 243, 244
Mijatovic correspondence, 298
Military cooperation, 291
Most Favored Nation status, 163,
Military transfers to Ethiopia, 237,
Oral message, 159
Mondale-Markovic meetings, 256
Iran hostage crisis:
Mondale visit (1977), 235
U.S. international broadcasting
Post-Tito contingency planning,
program and, 68
U.S.-Romanian relations and, 219,
Science/technology cooperation,
Tito condolences, 288, 289
Romania:
Ceausescu correspondence, 177,
Tito funeral delegation, 279, 280
Horodinca defection case, 222
Macovescu meetings, 187
Most Favored Nation status, 180,
Carter, Rosalynn, 82
Pungan meetings, 177
Carter-Ford debates (1976), 18
Rauta case, 195
Casey, Mary Ann, 101
Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and,
Ceausescu, Elena, 182, 225
Ceausescu, Nicolae (see also Romania):
Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, 36,
Soviet propaganda broadcasting, 65
U.S. covert publications program, 2
Blumenthal visit, 211
U.S. differentiated policy structure,
U.S. foreign trade:
Dissident movement and, 5, 26
Dissident repression, 179
Jackson-Vanik Amendment
Earthquake (1977), 182
waivers extension, 165
Horodinca defection case, 222
U.S. international broadcasting
Mondale meetings, 227
program:
Most Favored Nation status, 203
Holtzman investigation, 69
Pacepa defection case, 207
References are to document numbers

Ceausescu, Nicolae (see also
Romania)—Continued
Chernyayev, Rudilf, 37
China, People’s Republic of:
Romanian relations with, 198, 203,
Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, 219,
Soviet policy toward Eastern Europe
U.S. international broadcasting
and, 30
program, 58
Yugoslav relations with, 244, 251,
U.S. visit (1978). See under Romania,
U.S. relations with.
Cemalovic, Col. Gen. Enver, 245
Chramostova, Vlasta, 105, 106
Cemovic, Momcilo, 249
Christopher, Warren M.:
Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) (see
also U.S. covert publications
program):
German Democratic Republic, 120,
Czechoslovakia, 108
Dissident repression, 126
Hungary, 149
Eastern European political situations,
Polish crisis (1980), 41
Romania:
German Democratic Republic, 126
Carter-Ceausescu correspondence,
Memoranda:
PA M 79-10210, “East Germany:
The Chilly Winds of Spring,”
Dissident repression, 179
Export controls, 218
PA M 80-10166, “Romania: A
Situation Report,” 225
Most Favored Nation status, 215,
PA M 80-10385C, “Likely
Consequences in Eastern
Europe of the Polish Events,”
Norfolk port access, 218, 226
Pacepa defection case, 205, 207
RP-78-10293, “Dissidence in
Rauta case, 195
Eastern Europe,” 26
U.S. military sales proposals, 228,
RP M 78-10144, “Ceausescu’s
Romania: a Situation Report,”
World Bank/IMF loans, 234
U.S. differentiated policy structure,
Romania, 194, 225
U.S. international broadcasting
Soviet propaganda broadcasting, 65
program, 53
U.S. covert dissident support
Church, Frank, 237
Charter 77 movement (Czechoslovakia):
Claytor, W. Graham, Jr., 70
Bureau of Intelligence and Research
Cleland, Maj. Gen. John R. D., 261
reports, 110
Clough, Susan, 195
Christopher memoranda, 107
Cocirla, Trandafir, 213
CIA papers, 8, 26
Colotka, Peter, 108
Intelligence Memoranda, 5
Committee for the Defense of the
Prague Spring anniversary and, 105
Unjustly Prosecuted (VONS)
State Department papers, 30
(Czechoslovakia), 110
Committee of the Whole, 201, 252
U.S.-Czech discussions, 99
Committee of Workers’ Defense (KOR)
Vance memoranda, 100
Vest memoranda, 101
References are to document numbers

Conference on International Economic
Cutter, W. Bowman, 6
Cooperation (CIEC), 236
Czechoslovakia:
Conference on Security and
Cooperation in Europe (CSCE) (see
also Helsinki Accords; Helsinki
Dissident repression:
Accords implementation):
Bureau of Intelligence and
Belgrade conference (1977):
Research reports, 110
Byrne memoranda, 96, 106
Intelligence Memoranda, 5
Christopher memoranda, 107, 112
Treverton memoranda, 10
CIA papers, 8, 26
U.S.-Hungarian discussions, 162
Intelligence Assessments, 108
U.S.-Yugoslav discussions, 243,
Larrabee memoranda, 111
State Department papers, 30
Dissident movements and, 26
Tarnoff memoranda, 109
Madrid conference (1980):
Dissident movements and, 26, 110
Polish crisis (1980) and, 41
U.S.-Czech discussions, 99
U.S.-German Democratic Republic
Economic situation, 108, 116
discussions, 123
Foreign policy, 30, 116
U.S.-Hungarian discussions, 167,
Most Favored Nation status, 11, 116
U.S.-Romanian discussions, 198,
Soviet relations with, 108, 116
U.S. covert publications program, 28
U.S. policy review, 1
U.S. international broadcasting
Yugoslav role, 5, 236
program, 49, 116
Congress, U.S.:
U.S. relations with:
Conference on Security and
Bilateral Air Transport Agreement,
Cooperation in Europe, 10
Gold/claims issue:
Byrne-Long discussions, 102
German Democratic Republic, 123,
Byrne memoranda, 96
Christopher memoranda, 113
Hungary:
King memoranda, 103
Larrabee memoranda, 27, 115
Morton memoranda, 116
Delegation trips, 167
Nimetz-Johanes discussions, 104
Most Favored Nation status, 163,
Nimetz memoranda, 97
Polish crisis (1980) and, 44
Tarnoff memoranda, 109
U.S. international broadcasting
U.S.-Czech discussions, 99
Vance memoranda, 98
Yugoslavia, 297
Vest memoranda, 101, 114
Cook, Paul K., 121
Iran hostage crisis and, 36
Coordinating Committee for
Multilateral Export Controls
Morton memoranda, 116
(COCOM), 39
Nimetz-Johanes meetings, 104
Corvalan, Luis, 8
Polish crisis (1980) and, 44
Council of Jewish Federations and
Scientific/cultural exchanges, 96,
Welfare Fund, 215
Crane, Philip M., 136
Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and,
Critchlow, James, 70
References are to document numbers

Czechoslovakia—Continued
Eagleburger, Lawrence S.—Continued
U.S. relations with—Continued
Yugoslavia—Continued
U.S. differentiated policy structure
Military transfers to Ethiopia, 237
and, 16
Mondale-Kolisevski meetings, 290
Political situation, 301
Danescu, Alexandru, 58
Post-Tito contingency planning,
Daniel, Yuli, 26
Davis, Dick, 66
Tito funeral delegation, 280, 281
Deal, Timothy, 169
Denend, Leslie G., 261
Derian, Patricia M.:
German Democratic Republic, 122,
U.S. economic cooperation with,
Yugoslavia, 299
Derwinski, Edward J., 136, 214
Aaron-Vujatovic discussions, 270
Dinu, Adm. Stefan, 230, 231
Benson visit discussions, 271
Disarmament. See Strategic Arms
Harold Brown-Ljubicic
Limitation (SALT) talks; UN
discussions, 245
Special Session on Disarmament.
Larrabee memoranda, 268, 285,
Dissident movements (see also Human
rights; specific countries):
Scanlan memoranda, 267
CIA papers, 8, 26
U.S. trade with, 271
East Germany. See German Democratic
Intelligence Memoranda, 5
Republic.
Soviet Union, 26
East-West Planning Group, 22
U.S. covert support programs, 3, 8,
East-West relations. See U.S.-Soviet
relations.
Djilas, Milovan, 5, 283
Eastern European economic situations
Documents not declassified, 24
Eastern European foreign policies (see
Doherty, Ed, 155
also specific countries), 30, 36
Doicaru, Nicolae, 58
Eastern European political situations
Dole, Robert, 10, 136
Edminster, David K., 125, 129
Donovan, Hedley, 39
Egypt, 78
Eilberg, Joshua, 195
Draper, Morris, 70, 190
Elm, Joachim, 127
Dubcek, Alexander, 108
Emergency Refugee and Migration
Duffey, Joseph D., 82
Assistance Fund, 31
Duncan, Charles W., Jr., 6, 241
Emigration (see also Emigration policy
Dunlop, Harry, 261
and Family reunification cases
Dyulgerov, Petur, 81
under specific countries;
Dzhemilev, Mustafa, 8
Jackson-Vanik Amendment), 5, 26,
Eagleburger, Lawrence S.:
Enger, Valdik, 37
Yugoslavia:
English, Glenn, 123
Carter-Kardelj meetings, 244
Environmental Modification
Convention (ENMOD), 117
Harriman-Tito meetings, 256
Intelligence cooperation, 259, 260
Esposito, John, 68
Markotic case, 299
Military cooperation, 261
Ethiopia. See Horn of Africa.
References are to document numbers

German Democratic Republic
(GDR)—Continued
European Community (EC), 36
U.S. relations with—Continued
Consular convention:
Bolen-Honecker discussions, 118
Fair Trade Act, 196
Brzezinski memoranda, 134
Fascell, Dante, 47
Christopher-Bolen discussions,
Feaver, Douglas, 235
Fenwick, Millicent, 158
Christopher memoranda, 120,
Ferencz, Benjamin, 127
Derian-Nier discussions, 123
Feshbach, Murray, 68
Goodby-Nier discussions, 127,
Findley, Paul, 214
Larrabee memoranda, 132
Fish, Lt. Gen. Howard M., 245
Polansky-Fischer discussions, 117
Fojtik, Jan, 106
State Department papers, 11
Vance-Fischer discussions, 119,
Foreign Relations Authorization Act
Derian visit (1978), 123
France, 38, 132
GDR Interagency Group
Freedom House, 80
discussions, 124
Frelinghuysen, Peter H. B., 48
Iran hostage crisis and, 36
Fried, Edward, 88
Fromowitz, 192
Frosch, Robert A., 13
Funk, Gerald, 61
Larrabee reception attendance, 128
Polish crisis (1980) and, 44
Gabaj, Col. Vladimir, 261
Political consultations, 117
Scientific/cultural exchanges, 36,
Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and,
Genscher, Hans-Dietrich, 36, 120
Georgescu, Emil, 58, 179
State Department papers, 11
Georgescu, Vlad, 208
Treverton memoranda, 10
German Democratic Republic (GDR):
U.S. differentiated policy structure
Vance-Fischer meetings, 118, 119,
Economic situation, 26, 126
Family reunification cases, 122, 127
Germany, Federal Republic of (FRG):
Foreign policy, 30
German Democratic Republic
German Federal Republic relations
consular convention and, 120
with, 133, 135
German Democratic Republic
relations with, 133, 135
U.S. international broadcasting
Narcotics trafficking, 123
Getler, Michael, 96
Ghibernea, Marcel, 218
U.S. relations with:
Giddens, Ken, 47, 61
Christopher-Bolen discussions, 125
References are to document numbers

Helsinki Accords (see also Helsinki
Gorman, John, 153
Accords implementation):
Graham, Billy, 26, 146
Gravel, Mike, 98
Soviet VOA jamming and, 79
Helsinki Accords implementation (see
also Conference on Security and
Great Britain. See United Kingdom.
Cooperation in Europe):
Greece, 258
Dissident movements and, 110, 121
Griffin, Robert P., 158
Orlov Committee, 3, 8
State Department papers, 11
Grkovic, Col., 245
U.S.-Bulgarian discussions, 83, 85
Gronouski, John:
U.S.-German Democratic Republic
U.S. international broadcasting
discussions, 127
program:
U.S.-Hungarian discussions, 145, 173
BIB chair appointment, 47, 48
U.S. international broadcasting
Board for International
program and, 4
Broadcasting tensions, 62
Henze, Paul:
Soviet propaganda broadcasting, 65,
Holtzman investigation, 69
Holzkirchen modernization
U.S. covert publications program, 17,
proposals, 55
U.S. international broadcasting
Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty
program:
office relocation proposals, 67
Administration transition period
Special Coordination Committee
discussions, 70
Board for International
Broadcasting tensions, 62
Groza, Maria, 234
Gronouski BIB chair appointment,
Haferkamp, Wilhelm, 36
Holtzman investigation, 69
Haig, Gen. Alexander M. Jr., 176
Holzkirchen modernization
Hajek, Jiri, 110
proposals, 53
Haman, Josef, 108
Persian-language broadcasting, 61
References are to document numbers

Henze, Paul—Continued
Human rights movements. See
Dissident movements.
U.S. international broadcasting
Humphrey, Hubert H., 47, 158
program—Continued
Hungary:
Romania, 58
Annual policy/resource assessments,
Special Coordination Committee
discussions, 70
U.S. covert dissident support
Emigration policies, 163, 172
programs and, 37
Foreign policy, 30
Voice of America expansion
Human rights, 136, 173
proposals, 63, 64
Herz, Martin F., 85
Romanian relations with, 196, 213
State Department overview papers,
Hirri, Imam Muhmammed, 68
Hodges, Luther, Jr., 271
U.S. international broadcasting
Hoffmann, Karel, 108
program, 49, 67
Holbrooke, Richard, 254
U.S. relations with:
Hollai, Imre, 147
Aaron-Nagy meetings, 171
Holmes, H. Allen
Administration transition period
Holloway, Adm. James L., III, 235, 240,
Bergold memoranda, 175
Brzezinski-Huszar meetings, 166
Holtzman, Elizabeth, 69
Carter oral message, 159
Crown of St. Stephen:
Andrews memoranda, 136
Horelick, Arnold, 22, 278
Brzezinski memoranda, 143, 144,
Hormats, Robert, 149
Horn, Gyula, 176
Hartman memoranda, 141
Horn of Africa:
Hartman-Nagy discussions, 138
U.S.-Romanian discussions, 198, 199,
Hunter memoranda, 137
Hyland/Hunter memoranda, 140
U.S.-Yugoslav discussions, 236, 251,
Joint communique´, 160
Jordan memoranda, 153
Yugoslav military transfers, 237, 238,
Kaiser-Kadar discussions, 159
Kaiser-Losonczi discussions, 145
Hornblow, Michael, 4
Kaiser-Puja discussions, 151
Horodinca, Nicolae Ion, 222
King memoranda, 148, 157
Mudd memoranda, 139
Hoskinson, Samuel M., 2, 3
Nimetz memoranda, 155
Hovey, Graham, 75
NSC papers, 18
Hua Guofeng (Hua Kuo-feng), 205, 206,
Oakar communications, 160, 161
Presidential Directive NSC–21
Huberman, Benjamin, 12, 13
on, 16
Huebner, Nico, 133
Property issues, 139
Huffman, 200, 204
Reactions to return of, 152
Human rights (see also Dissident
State Department papers, 11
repression under specific countries;
Tarnoff memoranda, 146
U.S. human rights policy; specific
countries):
Brzezinski memoranda, 9
Vance-Puja discussions, 147
Helsinki Accords implementation
References are to document numbers

Hungary—Continued
U.S. relations with—Continued
Indra, Alois, 108
Ridgway-Esztergalyos meetings,
Inouye, Daniel K., 31
Intelligence Assessments:
Scientific/cultural exchanges, 139,
“Hungary on the Eve of the 12th
Party Congress,” 168
Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and,
PA–79–10354, “The Czechoslovak
Leadership,” 108
State Department papers, 11
Intelligence Information Cables,
U.S. differentiated policy structure
Situation: Goals and Problems of
Ceausescu’s Romania on the Eve of
U.S.-Soviet relations and, 139, 145
his Fourth Visit to the United
U.S. trade with:
States,” 193
Bergold memoranda, 175
Intelligence Information Special
Grain diversion, 169, 170
Reports, U.S. international
Hartman-Nagy discussions, 138
broadcasting program, 58
Kaiser memoranda, 167
Intelligence Memoranda, RP 77-10060,
Most Favored Nation status, 164
“Dissident Activity in East Europe:
Hartman-Nagy discussions, 138
An Overview,” 5
Hunter memoranda, 137
Inter-Balkan Conference (1976), 88
Kaiser-Kadar discussions, 159
Interagency Group on Europe, 36
Kaiser-Losonczi discussions, 145
International Atomic Energy Agency
King memoranda, 148
Mudd memoranda, 139
International Communications Agency
Presidential Directive NSC-21 on,
International Monetary Fund (IMF), 36,
State Department papers, 11
Vance memoranda, 149, 163
International Nuclear Fuel Cycle
Vance-Puja discussions, 162
Evaluation (INFCE), 247
NSC papers, 18
Ionel, Vasile, 223
State Department papers, 11
Hunter, Robert:
Ionita, Gen. Ion, 213
Iran hostage crisis:
U.S. differentiated policy structure, 6,
State Department papers, 36
U.S.-Bulgarian relations with and, 36
U.S. international broadcasting
U.S.-Hungarian relations and, 36, 171,
program, 53, 75
U.S. international broadcasting
U.S. presidential elections (1980) and,
Hurlbert, Gordon C., 271
U.S.-Romanian relations and, 36, 219,
Huszar, Istvan, 166, 167
Hyland, William G.:
Romania, 180
Iran-Iraq War, 299
U.S. international broadcasting
program, 45, 52
Israel (see also Arab-Israeli conflict), 73,
U.S. policy toward Eastern Europe, 1,
Italy, 258
Ieurnca, Virgiliu, 58
Ilic, Col. Bozidar, 261
Jackovich, Victor, 295, 296
References are to document numbers

Jackson, Henry M. (“Scoop”), 99, 163,
Katz, Julius L., 141
Jackson-Vanik Amendment:
Kempny, Josef, 108
Bulgarian Most Favored Nation
status and, 11
Keszthely, Tibor, 147
Czechoslovakian Most Favored
Khomeini, Ayatollah Ruhollah, 70
Nation status and, 11, 116
Khrushchev, Nikita, 26
German Democratic Republic Most
Kimmitt, Robert:
Favored Nation status and, 125
Hungarian Most Favored Nation
Romanian Most Favored Nation
King, John, 229
King, Robert R.:
Waivers extension, 165
Czechoslovakia, 103
Jagielski, Mieczyslaw, 38
Jakes, Milos, 108
Jakubec, Jaroslav, 99, 101
Jaroszewicz, Piotr, 5
Jaukovic, Col. Djordje, 261
U.S. policy toward Eastern Europe,
Javits, Jacob K., 163, 195
Kiralythe, Be´la, 152
Jewish community. See American
Kirilenko, Andrei P., 108
Jewish community.
Kirkland, Lane, 68, 75
Joetze, Gunter, 56
Klutznick, Philip M., 226
Knezevic, Rajko, 260
Knoche, E. Henry, 1
Johnson, Darryl N., 254
Kohler, Foy D., 47
Johnson Act (1934), 136
Kohout, Pavel, 5, 106
Jojic, Branka, 244
Kohoutova, Teresa, 106
Kolakowski, Leszek, 26
Kadar, Janos:
Crown of St. Stephen, 159
Korea:
Foreign policy, 30, 142
U.S.-Romanian discussions, 198, 203
Human rights, 5, 136
U.S.-Yugoslav communications, 238,
Most Favored Nation status, 159
Kostic, Petar, 288, 298
Kadenic, Col. Gen., 258
Kostov, Vladimir, 86
Kahout, Pavel, 105
Kosygin, Alexei, 108
Kaiser, Herbert, 219
Kovalev, Sergey, 8
Kaiser, Philip M.:
Kral, Richard, 106
Hungarian Most Favored Nation
Kramer, Frank, 230
Kreisberg, Paul H., 10, 231
Hungary’s Crown of St. Stephen, 145,
Kreps, Juanita M., 13, 177
Kriegel, Frantisek, 8
Krsko nuclear reactor (Yugoslavia), 249,
Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, 167
Kalugin, Oleg, 86
Krunic, Capt. Peter, 261
Kania, Stanislaw, 42, 44
Kukan, Eduard, 99
Kant, Hermann, 133
Kuklinski, Col. Ryszard, 42
Kapek, Antonin, 108
Kulikov, Marshal Viktor, 210
Kaplan, Robert D., 88
Kuron, Jacek, 26
References are to document numbers

Loncar, Budimir—Continued
Human rights, 299
Mondale meetings, 293
Landovsky, Pavel, 105
Post-Tito transition, 280, 289
Lapidus, Gail, 68
U.S. economic aid to Yugoslavia, 288,
Larrabee, Stephen:
Bulgaria, 93
U.S.-Yugoslav intelligence
cooperation, 260
Dissident movements, 37
Long, Clarence, 181
German Democratic Republic, 124,
Hungary, 166, 171
Losonczi, Pa´l, 145
Romania:
Lovetinsky, Cestmir, 108
Blumenthal visit, 210, 211
Brzezinski-Andrei meetings, 206,
Lowenstein, James G., 137
Ludviger, Emil, 244
Horodinca defection case, 222
Luers, William H.:
Mondale-Burtica meetings, 226
Most Favored Nation status, 214,
Hungary, 149, 150
U.S. military sales proposals, 223,
U.S. covert publications program, 17
U.S. international broadcasting
U.S. differentiated policy structure,
program, 53
U.S. policy toward Eastern Europe,
U.S. international broadcasting
Yugoslavia, 244, 254
Yugoslavia:
Lukanov, Andrei, 94
Lukazewicz, Jerzy, 38
Military cooperation, 270
Lyet, Paul, 113
Post-Tito contingency planning,
MacGregor, Clark, 47
Tito funeral delegation, 280, 282
U.S. economic aid, 298
Maksic, Malivoj, 251
Mamula, Adm. Branko, 273
Lazar, Gyorgy, 162
Manescu, Manea, 210
Lazarevic, Borislav, 244
Marchais, Georges, 243
Lederer, Jiri, 100
Marcuse, Gisela, 127
Marev, Spas Iordanov, 83, 85
Mareva, Ivanka Atanasova, 83, 85
Lenart, Jozef, 108
Marinescu, Teodor, 209, 218
Ler, Leopold, 108
Mark, David E., 70
Lipshutz, Robert, 199
Markoe, Frank, Jr., 48
Litynski, Jan, 106
Markotic, Mirko, 299
Ljubicic, Gen. Nikola:
Benson visit (1979), 271
Post-Tito political situation and, 269,
Marshall, Ray, 13
Matescu, Radu, 229
Mathews, Jessica Tuchman, 257, 263
Matic, Vladimir, 244, 254
U.S.-Yugoslav intelligence
Maynes, Charles W., 218
cooperation, 259, 260
McAuliffe, Eugene V., 136
Loncar, Budimir:
McCormack, 277
References are to document numbers

Muskie, Edmund S.:
Merry, Wayne, 135
Arab-Israeli conflict, 229
Meyer-Landrut, Nikolaus, 55
Hungary, 173
Michnik, Adam, 106
Middle East. See Arab-Israeli conflict.
Mihajlov, Mihajlo, 5, 8
U.S. international broadcasting
program, 67
Mikulic, Branko, 273, 283
Mutual and Balanced Force Reduction
Al-Min, Imam Khalil, 68
Mindszenty, Jo´zsef, 136, 159
Mutual Defense Assistance Control Act
Minic, Milos:
(Battle Act), 230
Carter visit (1980), 296
Mondale visit (1977), 236
Nagy, Ferenc:
Post-Tito political situation and, 269,
Administration transition period
Post-Tito transition, 288
Brzezinski-Huszar meetings, 166
Tito U.S. visit (1978), 254
Yugoslav military transfers to
Ethiopia, 237
Kadar U.S. visit proposals, 175
Mitchell, George H., 209
Most Favored Nation status, 138, 162
Ridgway meetings, 173
Naimsky, Piotr, 106
Mlynar, Zdenek, 26
National Foreign Intelligence Center
Modzelewski, Karol, 26
Memoranda, R PM 79–10075,
“Could Bulgaria Go the Way of
Mondale, Walter F.:
Romania?,” 90
Bulgaria, 82
National Intelligence Estimates, NIE
Export controls, 13
15–79, “Prospects for Post-Tito
Hungary, 152, 157
Yugoslavia,” 269, 273
National Security Decision Memoranda
U.S. differentiated policy structure,
(NSDM), NSDM 212, “Economic
Policies for the Eastern European
U.S. international broadcasting
Countries,” 94
program, 74
National Security Study Memoranda
U.S. policy review, 1
(NSSM), NSSM 245, “President’s
Yugoslavia:
Report to Congress Concerning
Carter-Kardelj meetings, 244
International Broadcast Facilities,”
Kolisevski meetings, 290
Loncar meetings, 293
New International Economic Order
Markovic meetings, 256
(NIEO), 198, 226
Tito funeral delegation, 288, 290
Newhouse, John, 6
U.S. economic aid, 298
Newsom, David D.:
Czechoslovakia, 114
Moore, Frank, 152
Romania, 220, 234
References are to document numbers

Newsom, David D.—Continued
U.S. international broadcasting
program, 61, 70
Oancea, Constantin, 222, 229
Obst, Harry, 122
Nicolae, Nicolae M.:
Arab-Israeli conflict, 188
Begin visit (1977), 184
Office of Management and Budget,
Carter-Macovescu meetings, 187
Carter-Pungan meetings, 177
Ogaden War. See Horn of Africa.
Okun, Herbert S., 135
Ceausescu visit proposals, 188
Olszowski, Stefan, 5
Dissident repression, 179
Rauta case, 195
Oprea, Gheorghe, 200, 204
Niklas, Manfred, 122
Orleans, Leo, 68
Nimetz, Matthew:
Orlov, Yuri F., 10
Orlov Committee, 7
Orlove, Yuriy, 3
Hungary:
Ornest, Ota, 100
Owen, Henry D., 6, 263
Owens, Carol, 82
Most Favored Nation status, 149,
Romania:
Dissident repression, 179
Emigration issues, 217
Paczkowski, Andrzej, 42
Most Favored Nation status, 185,
Palestine Liberation Organization
(PLO). See Arab-Israeli conflict.
Norfolk port access, 218
Palmer, Stephen, Jr., 277
Pacepa defection case, 207
Pastore, John, 47
Rauta case, 195
Patocka, Jan, 5, 110
U.S. military sales proposals, 228,
Pavlicek, Frantisek, 100
Pekic, Gen., 272
Vance-Andrei meetings, 209
Pelikan, Jiri, 3, 100
Vance visit plans (1979), 219
Pell, Claiborne, 158, 264
U.S. differentiated policy structure,
Percy, Charles H., 47, 48
Pernick, Irwin, 261
Pesic, Branko, 264, 265
Non-aligned movement (NAM), 236,
Petkovic, Radivoje, 244
Petnicki, Zvonimir, 254
Petran, Janos, 171
Nordhaus, William D., 6
Petrovich, Michael, 254
North Atlantic Treaty Organization
Plyushch, Leonid, 3, 8
(NATO), 10
Poland (see also Polish crisis (1980)):
Nosenzo, Louis V., 254
Novotny, Antonin, 26
Nowak, Jan, 57, 78
International Monetary Fund
Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty
membership, 36
John Paul II visit (1979), 35
Nyerges, Janos, 149
References are to document numbers

Poland (see also Polish crisis
Presidential Directives—Continued
(1980))—Continued
PD–59, “Nuclear Weapons
Soviet policy toward (see also under
Employment Policy,” 39
Presidential Review Committee, 4, 14
U.S. covert publications program, 3
Presidential Review Memoranda:
U.S. economic aid, 43, 44
NSC–9, Comprehensive Review of
U.S. international broadcasting
program, 49, 67
U.S. relations with:
NSC–31, “Export Control of U.S.
Carter visit (1977), 18
Technology,” 13
PRM/NSC–10, “Comprehensive Net
State Department papers, 11
Assessment and Military Force
U.S. differentiated policy structure
Posture Review,” 39
Press, Frank, 13
Polansky, Sol, 117
Puerto Rico, 85, 252
Christopher memoranda, 41
Pullai, Arpad, 139
German Democratic Republic and,
Pungan, Vasile:
Soviet policy toward Eastern Europe
Carter meetings, 177
Soviet VOA jamming and, 79
Human rights, 192
U.S.-Hungarian relations and, 44, 174,
Rauta case, 195
Pustay, Lt. Gen. John, 70, 278
U.S. international broadcasting
Putnam, Robert, 259
program and, 67
U.S.-Romanian discussions, 232, 233
U.S.-Yugoslav discussions, 299, 300
Quinn, Thomas H., 47
Popa, Dumitru, 213
Popov, Zdravko, 83
Raceanu, Mircea, 229
Popovic, Maj. Gen. Sveta, 258, 261
Rackmales, Robert, 121, 182
Porter, Elsa A., 124
Radakovic, Gen., 245
Potocar, Gen., 245
Radio Free Europe. See U.S.
Powell, Jody, 37
international broadcasting
program.
Radio Liberty. See U.S. international
Presidential Directives:
broadcasting program.
NSC–21, “Policy toward Eastern
Radulescu, Ilie, 213
Europe” (see also U.S.
Al-Rahman, Fazl, 68
differentiated policy structure),
Raicevic, Col., 261
Rakosi, Matyas, 26
PD–13, “Conventional Arms Transfer
Rakowska-Harmstone, Teresa, 68
Policy,” 240
PD–30, “Human Rights,” 196
PD–41, “U.S. Civil Defense Policy,”
Read, Ben, 281
Reagan, Ronald (see also Administration
PD–50, “Arms Control Decision
Process,” 39
Reese, Bill, 75
PD–53, “National Security
Reinhardt, John E.:
Communication Strategy,” 39
Bulgaria, 82
PD–57, “Mobilization Planning,” 39
Soviet propaganda broadcasting, 66
PD–58, “Continuity of Government,”
U.S. international broadcasting
References are to document numbers

Romania (see also Romania and
Arab-Israeli conflict)—Continued
Resor, Stanley R., 258, 259
Human rights (see also Emigration
Reston, James (“Scotty”), 251
policy above)—Continued
Revel, Jean-Francois, 193
Intelligence Memoranda, 5
Revesz, Miklos, 176
Vance-Macovescu discussions, 188
World Bank/IMF loans and, 234
Hungarian relations with, 196, 213
Journalist treatment, 179
Ringleb, Paul, 122
Roche, Col. William, 258, 261
Roche, John P., 47
Rohr, David, 215
Romania (see also Romania and
Arab-Israeli conflict):
Annual policy/resource assessment,
U.S. international broadcasting
China, People’s Republic of, relations
U.S. military sales proposals, 223,
U.S. relations with:
Annual policy/resource
assessment, 178
Emigration policy:
Blumenthal visit, 210, 211
Aaron-Bogdan discussions, 216
Brzezinski-Andrei meetings, 206,
American Jewish community
Carter-Ceausescu correspondence,
Annual policy/resource
assessment, 178
Carter-Macovescu meetings, 187
Brzezinski-Andrei discussions, 208
Carter-Pungan meetings, 177
Brzezinski memoranda, 197
Ceausescu visit (1978):
Carter-Pungan discussions, 177
Brzezinski memoranda, 181, 197
Ceausescu visit (1978) discussions,
Carter-Ceausescu meetings, 200,
Derian-Pungan discussions, 192
Goldberg memoranda, 199
Goldberg memoranda, 199
Inter-Agency Working Group
discussions, 189
Ridgway-Bogdan discussions, 233
Rauta case and, 195, 196
Vance-Andrei discussions, 209
Vance-Andrei meetings, 201, 202
Family reunification cases, 192, 195
Vance/Brzezinski-Ceausescu
meetings, 201
Vance-Macovescu discussions,
Horodinca defection case, 222
Human rights (see also Emigration
Vance memoranda, 198
policy above):
Vest/Derian/Lake memoranda,
Andrews memoranda, 195
Annual policy/resource
Vest memoranda, 192
assessment, 178
Ceausescu visit (1978) discussions,
Mondale-Burtica meetings, 226
Christopher memoranda, 179
Mondale-Patan meetings, 186
CIA papers, 26, 194
Newsom visit, 220, 221
References are to document numbers

Romania (see also Romania and
Romania and Arab-Israeli
Arab-Israeli conflict)—Continued
conflict—Continued
U.S. relations with—Continued
Carter-Macovescu discussions, 187
NSC papers, 18
Ceausescu visit (1978) discussions,
Ridgway-Andrei meetings, 229
Ridgway-Bogdan meetings, 232,
Newsom-Ceausescu discussions, 221
Ridgway-Andrei discussions, 229
Scientific/cultural exchanges, 189
Ridgway-Bogdan discussions, 233
Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and,
Vance-Andrei discussions, 209
Vance-Macovescu discussions, 188
Special emissary (1978), 205
Vance-Pungan discussions, 190
State Department papers, 11
Warsaw Pact PCC meeting and, 210
U.S. differentiated policy structure
Ronai, Rudolf, 136
Rose, Harald, 122
U.S.-Soviet relations and, 178, 189,
Rousselot, John H., 136
Vance-Andrei meetings, 209, 218
Rywkin, Michael, 68
Sandenberg, Ronaldo, 30
U.S. relief aid, 179, 181
Sanders, Edward, 75
U.S. trade with:
Sarbanes, Paul S., 195
Export controls:
Saudi Arabia, 70, 73
Brzezinski-Andrei discussions,
Scanlan, John D., 267, 273
Carter-Pungan discussions, 177
Schaufele, William, 38
Ceausescu visit (1978)
Schlesinger, James R., 13
Schmidt, Carl W.:
Vance-Andrei discussions, 209,
Bulgaria, 88, 94
Most Favored Nation status:
Aaron-Bogdan discussions, 216
Hungary, 136, 149
American Jewish community
discussions, 217
Barnes memoranda, 185
Blumenthal visit discussions, 211
Schneider, Mark, 234
Brzezinski memoranda, 180, 197
Schneider, Rolf, 131
Carter-Pungan discussions, 177
Schueler, Manfred, 52, 53
Ceausescu visit (1978)
Schulze, Richard, 217
Kreps-Pungan discussions, 177
Scott, David, 97, 98
Larrabee memoranda, 214, 215
Seabury, Paul, 78, 80
Mondale-Burtica discussions, 226
Seitz, Raymond, 292
Ridgway-Bogdan discussions,
Shahi, Agha, 229
State Department papers, 11
Sheehy, Ann, 68
Shenefield, John, 70
Shorish, Mobin, 68
Romania and Arab-Israeli conflict:
Shub, Tony, 62
Brzezinski-Andrei discussions, 208
Carter-Ceausescu correspondence,
Siddiqui, Muzammil, 68
References are to document numbers

Soviet Union—Continued
Sinyavskiy, Andrei, 26
Romanian relations with, 178, 193,
Slocombe, Walter, 14
Sloss, Leon, 6
U.S. covert publications program, 3,
Smith, Lt. Gen. William Y., 6
Solomon, Anthony M., 109
U.S. international broadcasting
Solzhentisyn, Aleksandr, 3, 8
program, 49, 70
Sonnenfeldt, Helmut
Yugoslav relations with (see also
Somalia. See Horn of Africa.
Post-Tito contingency planning
Sonnenfeldt, Helmut, 18, 21
Soviet invasion of Afghanistan:
Special Activities Working Group
Henze memoranda, 37
(SAWG), 2, 17
Post-Tito contingency planning and,
Special Coordination Committee (SCC),
Tito funeral delegation and, 279, 280,
Specter, George, 215
Spiers, Ronald I., 42
U.S.-German Democratic Republic
Stambolic, Petar, 273
relations and, 134
Stanishev, Dimitur, 81
U.S.-Hungarian relations and, 36, 167,
Stanton, Frank, 47, 48
Starcevic, Svetozar, 244, 254
U.S. international broadcasting
Starr, Joyce, 199
Stefanescu, Serban, 58
U.S. military sales to Yugoslavia and,
Stetkevych, Jaroslav, 68
Stivers, Ronald H.
U.S. presidential elections (1980) and,
Stevenson, Adlai E., III, 22, 189
Stivers, Ronald H., 70
U.S.-Romanian relations and, 36, 219,
Stoddart, Jonathan D., 110
Stojicic, Lt. Col. Gen., 245
Strategic Arms Limitation (SALT) talks:
Odom memoranda, 39
Soviet policy toward Eastern Europe:
State Department papers, 10
German Democratic Republic and,
U.S.-German Democratic Republic
discussions, 118
Intelligence community papers, 9
U.S.-Hungarian discussions, 162, 166,
Intelligence Memoranda, 5
“Perspectives” guidance, 8
U.S.-Yugoslav discussions, 244, 245,
Strauss, Peter, 69
Strougal, Lubomir, 108, 109
Suddarth, Roscoe S., 221
State Department papers, 30, 36
Suslov, Mikhail, 42
Soviet Union:
Taft, Robert, 47
Czech relations with, 108, 116
Talisman, Mark, 215
Tarnoff, Peter R.:
German Democratic Republic
Bulgaria, 93
relations with, 133
Czechoslovakia, 109
References are to document numbers

Tarnoff, Peter R.—Continued
Turner, Adm. Stansfield—Continued
U.S. policy toward Eastern Europe, 6,
German Democratic Republic, 132,
Yugoslavia, 260
Turturea, Nicolae, 229
Romania, 207, 220
Tverdokhlebov, Andrey, 3, 8
U.S. international broadcasting
Ukraine, 3
U.S. policy toward Eastern Europe,
Ulbricht, Walter, 121, 133
UN Special Session on Disarmament
Thatcher, Margaret, 38
U.S. covert dissident support programs,
Thomas, Helen, 195
Thompson, Frank, 136
U.S. covert publications program:
Thornton, Thomas, 61, 75
CIA papers, 3
Tigrid, Pavel, 100
Timofei, Ion, 226
Tito, Josip Broz:
Special Activities Working Group
discussions, 2, 17
Special Coordination Committee
discussions, 2, 23
Harriman meetings, 256
Turner memoranda, 28
Mondale visit (1977), 236
U.S. differentiated policy structure:
Political situation, Scanlan
Administration transition period
memoranda, 273
Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, 290
Toon, Malcolm, 211
Larrabee memoranda, 27
Trade Act (1974) (see also Jackson-Vanik
NSC papers, 18
Trattner, John H., 125
Policy Review Committee
Treverton, Gregory F.:
Belgrade CSCE meeting (1977), 10
Hungary, 144
Romania, 181
Presidential Directive NSC–21 on, 16,
U.S. international broadcasting
program, 53, 54
Presidential Review Committee
U.S. policy toward Eastern Europe, 4,
discussions, 14
Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and,
Trifa, Valerian, 69
Tuch, Hans, 70
Treverton memoranda, 10
U.S. foreign trade:
Turner, Adm. Stansfield:
Export controls (see also under
Export controls, 13
U.S. covert dissident support
Jackson-Vanik Amendment waivers
programs, 19
extension, 165
U.S. covert publications program, 20,
State Department papers, 11
U.S. human rights policy:
U.S. international broadcasting
Carter nomination acceptance speech
program, 71
References are to document numbers

U.S. human rights policy—Continued
U.S. international broadcasting
program—Continued
Detente and, 139
Voice of America expansion
proposals, 63, 64
U.S. policy toward Eastern Europe (see
Emigration issues and, 178
also U.S. differentiated policy
Policy Review Committee papers, 4
structure):
State Department papers, 11
Annual policy/resource assessments,
U.S.-German Democratic Republic
discussions, 123, 127
U.S.-Yugoslav discussions, 256
World Bank/IMF loans to Romania
Vance Budapest statement (1978), 94
and, 234
U.S. presidential elections (1980), 78,
U.S. international broadcasting
program:
U.S.-Soviet relations:
Administration transition period
Detente:
Board for International Broadcasting
Dissident movements and,
tensions, 62
Intelligence Memoranda, 5
State Department papers, 11
U.S.-Hungarian discussions, 166
U.S.-Hungarian relations and, 139,
Cherne memoranda, 76
U.S.-Yugoslav discussions, 251,
Christopher memoranda, 53
CIA papers, 3
Helsinki Accords implementation
Gronouski BIB chair appointment, 47,
and, 10
Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and,
Tito funeral delegation and, 279, 280,
Holzkirchen modernization
U.S.-Bulgarian discussions, 83
Intelligence Information Special
U.S.-German Democratic Republic
Reports, 58
discussions, 118
Morton memoranda, 116
U.S.-Hungarian relations and, 139,
U.S. policy toward Eastern Europe
Persian-language broadcasting, 61,
U.S.-Romanian relations and, 178,
Policy Review Committee
discussions, 6
U.S.-Yugoslav communications, 238,
Policy Review Committee papers, 4
Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty
office relocation proposals, 49,
Van Well, Gu¨nther, 56
Vance, Cyrus:
Soviet jamming, 79
Soviet propaganda broadcasting and,
Export controls, 13
Special Coordination Committee
German Democratic Republic, 118,
discussions, 70
U.S. covert dissident support
Helsinki Accords implementation, 10
programs and, 37
Hungary:
U.S.-Federal Republic of Germany
References are to document numbers

Vance, Cyrus—Continued
Vance, Cyrus—Continued
Hungary—Continued
Yugoslavia—Continued
Crown of St. Stephen—Continued
Brzezinski memoranda, 154
U.S. economic aid, 263
Hartman memoranda, 141
U.S. economic cooperation with,
Hyland/Hunter memoranda, 140
King memoranda, 157
U.S. military sales, 262, 285
Nimetz memoranda, 155
U.S. trade with, 271
Puja discussions, 147
Visit plans (1979), 273
Reactions to return of, 152
Vanik, Charles:
Most Favored Nation status, 149,
Czechoslovakia, 99
Iran hostage crisis, 219
Resignation, 228, 288
Romania:
Velchev, Boris, 81
Verdet, 213
Arab-Israeli conflict and, 184, 187,
Vest, George S.:
Ceausescu visit (1978), 198
Andrei meetings, 201, 202
Brzezinski memoranda, 181
German Democratic Republic, 120,
Carter-Ceausescu meetings, 200,
Ceausescu meetings, 201
Romania:
Goldberg memoranda, 199
Bogdan meetings, 233
Macovescu discussions, 188
Carter visit (1980), 229
Rauta case and, 196
Vest memoranda, 192
Human rights, 196
Dissident repression, 188
Most Favored Nation status, 215
Export controls, 218
Norfolk port access, 218
Horodinca defection case, 222
Pacepa defection case, 205
Human rights, 196, 198
Rauta case, 195, 196
Most Favored Nation status, 185,
U.S. military sales proposals, 223,
Norfolk port access, 218
U.S. trade with, 226
U.S. relief aid, 181
World Bank/IMF loans, 234
U.S. differentiated policy structure,
U.S. covert publications program, 2
U.S. international broadcasting
U.S. international broadcasting
U.S. policy toward Eastern Europe:
Yugoslavia:
Budapest statement (1978), 94
Djuranovic/Vrhovec meetings, 256
Policy review, 1
Mondale visit (1977), 236
U.S. differentiated policy structure,
Overflight issues, 251
Post-Tito contingency planning,
U.S. refugee assistance, 31
Yugoslavia:
Tito funeral delegation, 280
Brzezinski-Belovski meetings, 238
Tito U.S. visit (1978), 254
Djuranovic/Vrhovec meetings, 256
U.S. economic aid, 263
Intelligence cooperation, 259
U.S. military sales, 268
Military transfers to Ethiopia, 237
U.S. trade with, 271
Post-Tito contingency planning,
Vinocur, John, 75
Tito funeral delegation, 280, 281
Violette, Richard, 261
References are to document numbers

Yugoslavia—Continued
Voice of America (VOA) (see also U.S.
Markotic case, 299
international broadcasting
Military transfers to Ethiopia, 237,
Von Braunmuehl, 120
Non-aligned movement role, 236,
Von Dohnanyi, Klaus, 55
Von Staden, Berndt, 120
Vosicky, Pavel, 104
Post-Tito contingency planning, 274
Vujatvic, Col. Gen. Dusan, 258, 261
Bremer memoranda, 281
Brzezinski memoranda, 251, 275
Walesa, Lech, 38
Eagleburger memoranda, 281
Walter, Ralph, 57, 59
Larrabee memoranda, 276, 280
National Intelligence Estimates,
Warsaw Pact, 210, 211
Watergate scandal, 47
State Department papers, 284
Weil, Frank, 6
Vance memoranda, 285
Weiser, Benjamin, 42
Vest/Lake/Bartholomew
Western Europe, 10, 11
memoranda, 277
Soviet relations with (see also
Whalen, Charles W., Jr., 158
Post-Tito contingency planning
Wilson, Charlie, 158
Wischnewski, Hans Jurgen, 121
Tito condolences, 288, 289
Wise, Philip J., Jr., 289
U.S. economic aid:
Carter-Mijatovic correspondence,
Wolf, Konrad, 133
Wolff, Lester L., 114, 115
Carter visit discussions, 294, 295,
Workers Defense League (Poland), 5
World Bank (International Bank for
Eagleburger memoranda, 264, 265
Reconstruction and Development),
Hunter/Rentschler memoranda,
Muskie memoranda, 293
Young, Andrew J., 1, 16
Muskie-Vrhovec discussions, 299
Yugoslavia:
State Department papers, 36
Tarnoff memoranda, 292
U.S.-Yugoslav discussions, 288
Bulgarian relations with, 88, 246
U.S. military sales:
Chinese People’s Republic relations
Aaron-Vujatovic discussions, 270
Benson visit discussions, 271
Dissident movements, 5, 8
Harold Brown-Ljubicic discussions,
Brzezinski memoranda, 242, 243
Carter-Kardelj discussions, 244
Foreign policy, 30
Christopher memoranda, 288
Greek relations with, 258
Duncan memoranda, 241
Human rights, 5, 299
Eagleburger memoranda, 272, 286,
Italian relations with, 258
Hunter memoranda, 257
References are to document numbers

Yugoslavia—Continued
Yugoslavia—Continued
U.S. military sales—Continued
U.S. relations with—Continued
Kimmitt/Brement/Larrabee
Mondale-Loncar meetings, 293
memoranda, 266
Mondale-Markovic meetings, 256
Muskie-Vrhovec meetings, 299
Mondale-Tito discussions, 236
Overflight issues, 251
Scanlan memoranda, 267
Polish crisis (1980) and, 44
State Department papers, 36
Post-Tito, 252
Tarnoff memoranda, 240, 292
Science/technology cooperation,
Tito U.S. visit discussions, 249, 250,
Scientific/cultural exchanges, 249
U.S. military sales to Romania and,
Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and,
Vance memoranda, 262, 285
U.S. relations with:
Benson visit (1979), 271
U.S. differentiated policy structure
Brzezinski-Belovski meetings, 238
and, 4
Carter-Kardelj meetings, 243, 244
Vance visit plans (1979), 273
Carter-Mijatovic correspondence,
U.S. trade with:
Benson visit discussions, 271
Carter-Tito correspondence, 236,
Scanlan memoranda, 273
Tarnoff memoranda, 292
Consular access issue, Tito U.S.
Tito U.S. visit discussions, 249, 250,
visit discussions, 249
Cultural convention, 273
Economic cooperation, 248, 249,
Zaki, Sheikh Ahmad, 68
Harriman-Tito meetings, 256
Zaric, Mirko, 261, 295
Intelligence cooperation, 259, 260
Mondale-Kolisevski meetings, 290
Zhukov, Yuri, 105
References are to document numbers
