566 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 Based on our conversations today with Dr. DeBakey and with Ambassador Ambler Moss, we wanted to convey our thoughts to you prior to your breakfast meeting and discussions. Shah’s Medical History and Present Condition: At the time of the Shah’s departure from the States for Panama, he was experiencing an enlarged spleen. As this was a condition he had experienced before, his doctors decided to defer surgery. Over the last several weeks, the condition of his spleen has deteriorated and his spleen has enlarged to the point that his doctors consider the operation both necessary and critical. At the recommendation of his doctors, Dr. DeBakey was contacted and retained to perform the operation. The announcement of the selection of Dr. DeBakey infuriated and insulted the Panamanian doctors who have been caring for the Shah the several months he has been in Panama. Representatives of the Shah in New York made background statements to the press which said that the Panamanian doctors were not competent or qualified to perform the necessary surgery. This immediately surfaced in Panama in the media and prompted an emotional and irrational response by the doctors that DeBakey could not operate at the Panamanian hospital. Ironically, most of these same Panamanian doctors were trained in medical schools in the United States. At any rate, Dr. DeBakey arrived in Panama to find a very unpleasant situation. He found the medical staff at the hospital—on whom he would have to depend during and after the operation—resentful of his presence and almost openly hostile to him. His immediate reaction was to say that he would withdraw from the case, as his only interest was in seeing that the Shah received proper medical attention. From all that we know, the reaction of the doctors was spontaneous and genuine and not stimulated by the government. However, once they took a public position of being opposed to DeBakey doing the surgery, the government did not attempt to reverse it. After a coolingoff period which took the good efforts of Ambassador Moss, Dr. De- Bakey and the key Panamanian doctor met to resolve their differences. The Panamanian doctor was embarrassed at the situation that had been created and pledged a more cooperative attitude in the future. It was agreed by both doctors that a cooling-off period was necessary, and that a delay of up to two weeks was medically tolerable for the Shah. Realizing that he might very well have to operate in the Panama hospital ultimately, Dr. DeBakey went to great lengths to make peace with the doctors. But he left Panama shaken by his encounters with them and concerned about conducting the operation in such a hostile atmosphere. DeBakey told us that one of the Panamanian doctors has reported to him that he has been offered $1 million to kill the Shah.
