2 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I “You should stress your own varied background—e.g. farmer and nuclear physicist—with emphasis on your foreign policy experience. “Your accomplishments should not be set out in washer-list form but should be interspersed throughout the speech.” (Carter Library, 1976 Presidential Campaign, Issues Office, Issues Office—Stuart Eizenstat, Box 1, Announcement Speech, 9/74–12/74) Carter formally announced his candidacy at events both in Washington and Atlanta, Georgia. In an address he delivered at a luncheon held at the National Press Club, Carter briefly described his background, stressing the commonalities and dreams he believed all Americans shared. Such dreams, he rued, had been compromised by “debilitating compromise, acceptance of mediocrity, subservience to special interests, and an absence of executive vision and direction.” He called for the American people to “reaffirm and to strengthen our ethical and spiritual and political beliefs,” setting out specific steps that governmental officials should take to regain public trust. With regard to foreign policy, Carter asserted: “It is obvious that domestic and foreign affairs are directly interrelated. A necessary base for effective implementation of any foreign policy is to get our domestic house in order. “Coordination of effort among the leaders of our nation should be established so that our farm production, industrial development, foreign trade, defense, energy, and diplomatic policies are mutually supportive and not in conflict. “The time for American intervention in all the problems of the world is over. But we cannot retreat into isolationism. Ties of friendship and cooperation with our friends and neighbors must be strengthened. Our common interests must be understood and pursued. The integrity of Israel must be preserved. Highly personalized and narrowly focused diplomatic efforts, although sometimes successful, should be balanced with a more wide-ranging implementation of foreign policy by competent foreign service officers. “Our nation’s security is obviously of paramount importance, and everything must be done to insure adequate military preparedness. But there is no reason why our national defense establishment cannot also be efficient.” (The Presidential Campaign 1976, volume I, part II: Jimmy Carter, pages 3–4, 9) Carter’s handwritten notes outlining the specific items he intended to include in the draft are in the Carter Library, 1976 Presidential Campaign, Issues Office—Stuart Eizenstat, Box 1, Announcement Speech, 9/74–12/74. Later that evening, Carter addressed a rally of family, friends, and political supporters at the Atlanta Civic Center. In his remarks, Carter asserted that winning the Presidency was not the “most important thing in my life.” Continuing, he noted: “There are many other things
