1332  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
reasons that right at outset these talks I had suggested they be private 
in character. My sole interest was finding method resolving this prob­
lem so that it could be removed as irritant our relations. I had known 
from talks we had 1954 attitude his govt with regard Chinese students 
in US. I had attempted before we ever came here to meet his point view 
in this regard. I had not raised with him any question US sovereignty, 
US jurisdiction, or other such theoretical questions. My govt had taken 
action to resolve this question to his satisfaction. My govt had taken 
action to entirely remove restraints which had been placed to departure 
of some few Chinese from my country. I had conceded to his point view 
on declaration by US. At same time, he knew perfectly well my primary 
interest was in these imprisoned Americans. It perfectly proper for us 
reach agreement which included not just Chinese in US but Americans 
in his country. His reaching such agreement was certainly not in any 
way derogation sovereignty but was an exercise his sovereignty.
8. I continued, insofar as discussions leading up to agreement 
concerned, he would recall that they concerned these imprisoned 
Americans. I would not take time review those discussions—he was 
as familiar with them as I. He would recall though that particularly 
in discussion leading up finally to use world “expeditiously” in that 
agreement, it related to time when these imprisoned Americans would 
be released. Fact he and his authorites at that time well recognized this 
agreement related to imprisoned Americans had been well demon­
strated by their release ten imprisoned Americans on same day and in 
connection with issuance agreement. For his authorities now to go back 
and say the agreement has no relation to those imprionsed Americans—
just persons we talking about at time we made the agreement—simply 
not logical, just, or defensible.
9. I continued, he spoke of threats, pressure, exercise sovereignty. 
Hard as I tried understand and follow him on this I just unable do so. 
I could not see how asking that agreement freely entered into be carried 
out constitutes threats or pressure. I could not understand how any 
govt able say carrying out by it of agreement, into which it has entered, 
is derogation of its sovereignty. In fact it seems me it is opposite—it is 
exercise of its sovereignty. If I or my govt wanted see continuation of 
type relations which had so unhappily heretofore existed between us—
certainly never would have laid stress I had on importance resolving 
this question civilians.
10. I continued, for him to demand concessions and agreements 
from me on other subjects prior to resolving what our govts both agreed 
was first question between us and prior carrying out this first agree­
ment between us, is taking completely unilateral point view. At times 
his authorities and he here seemed take position their failure carry out 
this agreement based upon allegation agreement did not cover these
