Afghanistan 603 needed to carry out the program that the President had previously approved for the remainder of 1980. The funds will be matched by another country. (S) Admiral Turner briefed the meeting on the details of the program; some signs of effectiveness are already being noticed. (S) All member agencies agreed that the money should be provided. The only reservation noted was OMB’s concern that the amount might prove to be insufficient. (S) Anti-tank and anti-aircraft weapons remain the insurgents’ greatest need. Soviet-origin equipment is becoming very expensive, however, and SA–7s are in very short supply. It was agreed that CIA would approach Egypt to see if the Egyptians could purchase Yugoslav-built SA–7s and then pass them on to us. Jordan, Saudi Arabia and Pakistan should also be asked to seek to obtain SA–7s on our behalf from Algeria and possibly other countries with large stocks. (S) CIA was also asked to try to increase its intelligence take from the insurgents. (S) 221. Memorandum From the Vice President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Clift) to Vice President Mondale1 Memo No. 907–80 Washington, February 28, 1980 SUBJECT George Kennan’s Assessment of Current Soviet Leadership and the Afghanistan Invasion You asked me if there was anything to the assertions by George Kennan (article at Tab A) that Soviet actions in Afghanistan were out of character for Brezhnev, Kosygin and Gromyko.2 CIA has responded 1 Source: Carter Library, Donated Historical Material, Mondale Papers, Box 70, Foreign Countries—USSR: 1–2/80. Top Secret; Codeword. In the upper right corner an unknown hand wrote: “VP has seen.” 2 The article, attached at Tab A but not printed, is George Kennan, “Washington’s Reaction to the Afghan Crisis: ‘Was This Really Mature Statesmanship?’” New York Times, February 1, 1980, p. A27. Kennan asserted that the decision for the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan was “abrupt,” “bizarre,” and “clumsy” which suggested “the recent breakthrough, to positions of dominant influence, of hard-line elements much less concerned for world opinion, but also much less experienced, than these older figures,” that is, Kosygin, Brezhnev, and Gromyko.
