550 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II policy; to outline its successes and its hopes; to show how your personal commitment to it arises from your personal experience; and to place it in the context of both American and world history. (The sentence about “messiahs” on page 3 is, of course, a response to the Jonestown horror.4 It is designed to exert moral leadership by getting down to the fundamentals: whatever the cause, the murder of children is unacceptable.) NOTE: As an alternative to a prepared speech, we have also attached talking points.5 4 Reference is to the mass suicides committed at the Peoples’ Temple, a religious commune led by Jim Jones, in Jonestown, Guyana, in late November 1978. The Peoples’ Temple had come under scrutiny by relatives of sect members, who alleged that Jones had enslaved and mistreated many of his followers. Leo Ryan, a Democratic Representative from California, flew to Georgetown, Guyana, on November 14 in order to investigate conditions in Jonestown. Several of Ryan’s aides, Department of State officials, U.S. journalists, and families of sect members (hoping to aid in the defection of their relatives) accompanied Ryan. Ryan, three journalists, and a defector were killed and seven others injured as they attempted to leave Port Kiatuma, where the delegation had chartered two planes to return to the United States. Following the ambush, Jones instructed commune members to commit suicide by drinking a cyanide-laced beverage. See David Binder, “Coast Congressman Believed Slain Investigating Commune in Guyana,” The New York Times, November 19, 1978, p. A–1 and “Guyana Official Reports 300 Dead At Religious Sect’s Jungle Temple,” The New York Times, November 20, 1978, p. A–1. 5 Attached but not printed. Brzezinski added the following handwritten notation: “A speech would have much more impact. ZB.” 174. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the Department of State (Tarnoff) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, December 5, 1978 SUBJECT The President’s Meeting with Secretary Vance and Assistant Secretary Patt Derian on the Human Rights Policy, Wednesday, December 6, 1978, at 10:30 a.m. The President will meet with Secretary Vance and Assistant Secretary Derian to discuss the Administration’s human rights policy.2 They 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Deputy Secretary: Records of Warren Christopher, 1977–1980, Lot 81D113, Box 9, Memoranda to the White House— 1978. No classification marking. 2 The memorandum of conversation of the December 6 meeting is printed as Document 175.
