February 1951–February 1952
25
e. Exposure of USSR responsibility and consideration of reference
of the situation to the United Nations.
6. In the event of overt attack by organized USSR military forces
against Iran, the United States in common prudence would have to pro-
ceed on the assumption that global war is probably imminent. Accord-
ingly, the United States should then immediately:2
a. Seek, by political measures, to localize the action to stop the ag-
gression, to restore the status quo, and to ensure the unity of the free
world if war nevertheless follows. These measures should include di-
rect diplomatic action and resort to the United Nations with the objec-
tives of:
(1) Making clear to the world United States preference for a
peaceful settlement and the conditions upon which the United States
would, in concert with other members of the United Nations, accept
such a settlement.
(2) Obtaining agreement of the United Nations authorizing
member nations to take appropriate action in the name of the United
Nations to assist Iran.
b. Consider the possibility of a direct approach to the highest So-
viet leaders.
c. Place itself in the best possible position to meet the increased
threat of global war.
d. Consult with selected allies to perfect coordination of plans.
e. While minimizing United States military commitments in areas
of little strategic significance, take action with reference to the aggres-
sion in this critical area to the extent and in the manner best contrib-
uting to the implementation of United States national war plans.3
2 At the March 21 meeting, the NSC adopted NSC 107, although it noted the “fol-
lowing views of the Joint Secretaries regarding NSC 107, as read by the Secretary of De-
fense: ‘The Joint Secretaries recommend that NSC 107 be rejected in its entirety. The heart
of NSC 107 is paragraphs 5 and 6; what to do in case of internal subversion in Iran and
what to do in case of a Soviet attack, respectively. Neither paragraph faces up to the ques-
tion. They are safe innocuous statements of generalities which do not indicate anything
except watchful waiting. A policy document for Iran must bluntly face the facts. If we
cannot do anything we should say so. If we can take concrete steps in either contingency
we should specifically so state. Until a complete study as to specific manner and means
by which we can protect the interests of the West in Iran has been completed we should
not attempt to establish a national policy with respect to that country, particularly in
view of current developments.’” (National Archives, RG 273, Records of the National Se-
curity Council, Official Minutes 1947–1961, Box 12, 87th Meeting)
3 In a memorandum from Vice Admiral A.C. Davis, Director of the Joint Staff, to the
Secretary of Defense, March 19, the JCS echoed many of the reservations expressed by the
Joint Secretaries. Nevertheless, Davis wrote that the JCS, “from the military point of view,
perceive no objection to the use of the statement of policy on Iran in NSC 107 as an in-
terim working guide.” (Ibid., Policy Papers, Box 194, NSC–107 (Section 2)) President
Truman approved NSC 107 on March 24 and directed the Department of State to submit
monthly progress reports. (Memorandum from Lay to the NSC, March 26; ibid., Official
Minutes 1947–1961, Box 12, 87th Meeting)
