September 18–December 16, 1978 239 The Secretary said the President wanted him to convey the need to seize the opportunity provided by Camp David. We have seen the Saudi government statement. We realize that a number of our friends in the area have concerns about the agreements. The Secretary said he would like to try to resolve any questions Fahd might have. We recognize that the Camp David agreements do not contain everything we and others would have liked. Fahd said the Saudi statement had been carefully worded. In his view it had forestalled a few things from happening. Time will point out the advantages of the Saudi statement. The Secretary said it is important to look not only at what is not in the agreements, but at the very substantial new elements which they contain from the Arab point of view. Camp David achieved an Israeli commitment to resolve the final status of the West Bank and Gaza within five years. For years Israel refused to face up to the West Bank issue. Even this year the Israelis talked only about considering it at some point in the future. Now Israel is committed to considering it within five years. This may seem long but political vitality of the West Bank is like a new born child which takes time to gain strength and learn to walk. The agreement states that solutions must be in accordance with all the provisions and all parts of resolution 242. This means also that the principle of withdrawal in the West Bank and Gaza applies, as it does to the other fronts. The U.S. side had sought for hours and days to get Israel to sign a document saying that 242 applies in all its parts and provisions. The Secretary continued that the framework agreement is designed to provide a comprehensive settlement. In its first operative paragraph it says “They therefore agree that this framework as appropriate is intended by them to constitute a basis for peace not only between Egypt and Israel, but also between Israel and each of its other neighbors which is prepared to negotiate peace with Israel on this basis.” The Secretary continued that Israeli military occupation would end. The agreements provide that a commission of Egypt, Jordan, if it will, and Israel will sit down with a committee of West Bankers to proceed through free elections for an administrative council. Although it is not spelled out, the understanding of the parties was that inhabitants of the West Bank and Gaza, regardless of political affiliation, could be elected, including persons affiliated with the PLO. The Secretary said he wanted to make clear that he means residents of the West Bank or Gaza and not PLO members from outside that area. Fahd said he understood this to mean that the governing authority would not include Palestinians from outside the West Bank and Gaza.
