Chapter 2, January–June 1989  27
To this end, I recommend the Administration engage key 
Congressional figures early in the review process, with the objective of 
determining a strategic modernization program that will enjoy strong 
bipartisan support over an extended period. In so doing, we should 
recall the experience of the past, in which support for a widely accepted 
compromise (i.e. the Scowcroft Commission recommendations) fell 
apart over time, and seek a program that is maximally immunized 
against year-­to-­year buffeting.
Force Structure Issues
For strategic offensive forces, the key force structuring issues con-
cern the land-­based and air-­based legs. You are well aware of the ICBM 
vulnerability problem. The top priority for strategic forces should be to 
find a survivable ICBM that can be deployed. I am skeptical of the rail-­
garrison MX, because of the warning time it requires; more attractive 
options are the single-RV Midgetman (with perhaps some deployed in 
silos to save money and the rest road-­mobile), a road-­mobile 2-RV mis-
sile, and, the one I prefer, a single- or 2-RV missile deployed in a shell-­
game scheme. For the air-­based leg, we need to determine the best mix 
of B-52s, B-1s and B-2s, given B-1 performance problems and the cost of 
B-2s. The number of B-2s we buy could affect the availability of funds 
for the ICBM program.
For strategic defense, the Administration needs to address some 
basic questions about SDI. How fast do we wish to proceed with the pro-
gram, given the state of technology and resource constraints, and with 
what goal in mind? I favor a program that is robust without being waste-
ful in allocating more funds than can be efficiently absorbed and without 
skewing funding away from other priority needs. I believe the current 
level of funding, perhaps with modest growth over the next several years, 
fits that criterion. (Senator Nunn expressed a similar view on the Brinkley 
show recently.) As for the goal, I recommend seeking a system that would 
be survivable and cost effective against existing and future Soviet threats; 
I do not believe limited protection against a third-­country ballistic missile 
threat would be worth the cost. Regardless of how fast the program pro-
ceeds, it is likely at some point to reach a level where ABM Treaty compli-
ance questions arise. Accordingly, the Administration should begin soon 
to work out internally and with the Congress an agreed understanding of 
the constraints the ABM Treaty places on ABM development and testing 
activities.
START Issues
There are two tasks for the START review: to revisit agreed ele-
ments and to assess U.S. positions on outstanding issues. I believe the
