106  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
ETA–44.	
Memorandum from the Acting Secretary of State to the 
President1

Washington, August 1, 1960.
SUBJECT
Latin American Program.
To fulfill your announcement in Newport and to meet the need 
for a positive United States approach at the September 5th meeting in 
Bogotá, we should now press forward with a broad program for Latin 
America designed to bring the benefits of economic and social progress 
to a wider segment of the population.
To insure the success of this program and to enable the United 
States to speak authoritatively at the Bogotá conference there is need 
for bipartisan support. I suggest, therefore, that you consider laying 
the program which is outlined in the following paragraphs before the 
leadership of both parties at an early date.
The specific elements in the program which should be discussed 
are the following:
a) Size of the Program: Given the magnitude of the need, I believe 
that it should be couched in terms of a minimum of $600 million. It 
should be made clear that this amount would not be expended in any 
particular fiscal year but is intended to be used over a period of time 
as sound opportunities for its use arise. It should also be made clear 
that, depending on the impact of the program and on the performance 
among recipient countries, this would be the first installment on a 
long-­term program, and that additional amounts would, therefore, be 
required in the future to meet demonstrated needs.
b) Use of Funds: Adequate “hard-­loan” funds for sound economic 
development projects are already available in various national and 
international lending agencies, such as the Export-Import Bank and 
the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development. Because 
of the increasing difficulty most Latin American countries have experi-
enced in servicing “hard” loans, the Development Loan Fund has also 
been extending “soft” loans for sound economic development proj-
ects in certain categories. There is, however, an immediate need which 
has not heretofore been met for substantially more financing of social 
development projects such as land settlement, improved land use, pilot 
and self-­help housing, basic community facilities, and vocational train-
ing. While existing programs have reasonably met the capital needs of 
industrial expansion, there has been very little foreign assistance avail-
able for social development projects. Although the primary responsi-
bility for social development must rest with the country concerned, the 
Latin American countries are not in a position to carry the entire burden 
1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, Dulles-Herter Series. Confidential.
