1978 379 87. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to President Carter1 Washington, September 15, 1978 SUBJECT FY 1980 Defense Program Since you appointed me Secretary of Defense, my own greatest concern has been assuring the adequacy of our defense against the growing threat from the Soviet Union. Though the U.S. has many other grave foreign policy problems, I believe that this one must take precedence in my thinking, because on the adequacy of that defense depends the protection of our country’s physical existence and its vital interests in the world, and the deterrence of a nuclear war whose occurrence would end the world as we know it. —On August 13 I sent you a memorandum outlining the defense program for FY 1980–84 as projected at three different fiscal levels.2 To maintain a coherent process in the FY 1980 budget preparation, it is necessary for you now to select a program level for the FY 80–84 period, with associated fiscal level. This will provide a basis for me to have prepared, for submission to you, the proposed budget request for FY 1980. —On September 8 at Camp David I gave you a paper by the Joint Chiefs of Staff on this subject.3 That paper is, in my view, an accurate statement (though incomplete, as any statement inevitably is) of the current military balance and the trends. I subscribe to what it says in that regard. The present military trend is highly unfavorable to us. I believe we cannot permit that trend to continue, if we are to meet our responsibility to the nation’s security. It is in our power to stop the balance from becoming clearly adverse. To do so requires a greater defense effort. I believe that this is one of the most important single decisions as to which I shall make a recommendation to you, and that your decision will directly affect the safety of the people of this country. 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Agency File, Box 5, Defense Department: 9/78. Secret. Carter initialed the upper right corner of the memorandum. In a September 22 memorandum, Brzezinski informed Brown that Carter had seen the memorandum (Ibid.) 2 See Document 75. 3 See Document 83.
