3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 June–December 1977 143 some of the negative tendencies noted in regards to the other major issues, and on how we can deal with the irritants that have emerged in our relations. The foregoing was answered by Dobrynin who spoke at great length and with considerable feeling about his sense of grave concern regarding the state of U.S.-Soviet relations. He emphasized to me that he wanted to give me as accurate a feel for the atmosphere in Moscow as he can conceivably convey. He stressed that the Soviet leaders are very perplexed about what it is that the Carter Administration is trying to do. He stated that Brezhnev recently asked him to provide one concrete example of the new Administration’s willingness to improve U.S.-Soviet relations and that Dobrynin was at a loss as to how to answer. Dobrynin specifically mentioned a number of examples which in his view were counterproductive: the negative decision on the Cyber computer;4 the publicity given to new weapons systems which seem to be designed to put the Soviet Union under pressure; the President’s use of the word “aggressively” when the President recently spoke of the U.S. desire to pursue policies designed to diminish Soviet influence in certain friendly countries. Dobrynin stated that all of the foregoing is creating the impression in Moscow that we are more interested in competition than in cooperation and that this necessarily affects the Soviet attitude on specific issues. In addition to the foregoing, he noted the following minor specific points, which strike me as worthy of note: a. He said he was surprised that lower level State Department officials seem to be familiar with the fact as well as with the content of the President’s correspondence with Brezhnev; b. That U.S. delegations to recent bilateral U.S.-Soviet talks on nuclear and other issues did not seem to be well prepared and not ready to negotiate in detail. Turning to SALT, Dobrynin emphasized that the Soviet position is that the United States is deliberately attempting to significantly affect the central component of the Soviet nuclear force, namely groundbased missiles. This he feels is unequal and one-sided. He also stressed that the Soviet Union made a deliberate bow to the President by proposing recently that both sides reduce their arsenals to 2250; he emphasized this point, stressing that this had not been the Soviet intention but that it was a goodwill gesture aimed at the President personally. 4 Reference is to the Carter administration’s refusal to sell the Soviet Union a Cyber 76 computer, which would reportedly be used for meteorological study. See Jack Anderson and Les Whitten, “Carter Blocks Sale of Computer,” The Washington Post, June 13, 1977, p. B13.
