3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
June–December 1977
143
some of the negative tendencies noted in regards to the other major
issues, and on how we can deal with the irritants that have emerged in
our relations.
The foregoing was answered by Dobrynin who spoke at great
length and with considerable feeling about his sense of grave concern
regarding the state of U.S.-Soviet relations. He emphasized to me that
he wanted to give me as accurate a feel for the atmosphere in Moscow
as he can conceivably convey. He stressed that the Soviet leaders are
very perplexed about what it is that the Carter Administration is trying
to do. He stated that Brezhnev recently asked him to provide one con-
crete example of the new Administration’s willingness to improve
U.S.-Soviet relations and that Dobrynin was at a loss as to how to an-
swer. Dobrynin specifically mentioned a number of examples which in
his view were counterproductive: the negative decision on the Cyber
computer;4 the publicity given to new weapons systems which seem to
be designed to put the Soviet Union under pressure; the President’s use
of the word “aggressively” when the President recently spoke of the
U.S. desire to pursue policies designed to diminish Soviet influence in
certain friendly countries.
Dobrynin stated that all of the foregoing is creating the impression
in Moscow that we are more interested in competition than in coopera-
tion and that this necessarily affects the Soviet attitude on specific
issues. In addition to the foregoing, he noted the following minor spe-
cific points, which strike me as worthy of note:
a. He said he was surprised that lower level State Department offi-
cials seem to be familiar with the fact as well as with the content of the
President’s correspondence with Brezhnev;
b. That U.S. delegations to recent bilateral U.S.-Soviet talks on nu-
clear and other issues did not seem to be well prepared and not ready
to negotiate in detail.
Turning to SALT, Dobrynin emphasized that the Soviet position is
that the United States is deliberately attempting to significantly affect
the central component of the Soviet nuclear force, namely ground-
based missiles. This he feels is unequal and one-sided. He also stressed
that the Soviet Union made a deliberate bow to the President by pro-
posing recently that both sides reduce their arsenals to 2250; he empha-
sized this point, stressing that this had not been the Soviet intention but
that it was a goodwill gesture aimed at the President personally.
4 Reference is to the Carter administration’s refusal to sell the Soviet Union a Cyber
76 computer, which would reportedly be used for meteorological study. See Jack An-
derson and Les Whitten, “Carter Blocks Sale of Computer,” The Washington Post, June 13,
1977, p. B13.
