International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978 407 new concerns such as excessive capacity build-ups through government policy and financial intervention. 3. An Upgraded and Modernized GATT Within the GATT framework itself, we are seeking A. Improved understandings and guidelines for —balance of payments actions —preferential arrangements between LDC’s, and B. The introduction of the concepts of —graduation for advanced LDC’s, and —embryonic guarantees of supply access (e.g., limitations on export restraints) REORIENTATION OF U.S. TRADE POLICY WITH “DEFENSIVE” APPEAL In addition to the elements of a defensive package that are being negotiated in the Tokyo Round, these must be supplemented by some wide ranging reorientations of overall U.S. trade policy. Key elements should probably include the following: 1. Improved Domestic Programs and Processes A. Adjustment Assistance: Here we need a workable, substantive effort with the support of organized labor to help pragmatically the adjustment of workers displaced in industry, particularly in those sectors with rising imports. Both Murray Finley and Sol Chaikin, during their Geneva visits,4 said they felt this is a must. Certainly Congressman Vanik has been disappointed that no new program has come forward yet from the Administration in this area. B. Programs for Youth Training and Retraining of the Unemployed: A Government-sponsored series of incentives to private industry for (a) building skills in our otherwise unemployed youth and for (b) retraining workers dislocated through industrial restructuration is badly needed. This would have wide appeal. One would expect for relatively small sums of money, with the active support of private industry, this could represent a major move toward ensuring higher levels of employment long-term for the less qualified elements of our society. C. Simplification of Processes on Injury Determination: One of industry’s major complaints is that the U.S. Government itself is the biggest obstacle to gaining recognition of its problems and obtaining ap- 4 Finley visited the U.S. MTN delegation in Geneva on April 12 and 13. (Telegram 5683 from Geneva, April 18; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780166–0167) Chaikin visited Geneva on May 17 and 18. (Telegram 7836 from Geneva, May 22; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780215–0151)
