International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues 1093 programs. Of particular interest is the future of the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), which will soon need its first replenishment of funds. IFAD’s initial resources came 56% from OECD countries and 43% from OPEC countries. Its lending has concentrated on expanding food production by and for the rural poor in countries with the more serious food deficits. IFAD represents a very promising prototype of OECD/OPEC/other LDC cooperation for development. Assuming continued effective performance and OPEC assistance, the United States should participate in the replenishment of IFAD’s resources. Population and Health We will increase our population and health programs, and will give priority to countries with a demonstrated commitment in these areas to help meet their objectives. Development continues to be frustrated by rapid population growth. If recent trends continue, the two-child family will not become the average world-wide until 2020, and the world’s population will not stabilize until 2090—at 10 billion compared to today’s 4.3 billion. Population is a global problem, but the effects are suffered first and most by the poor in poor countries. Reduced population growth enhances the possibility for increased investment in productive employment opportunities and reduces the demands on food, housing, health care, and educational facilities. The United States must do more to encourage and support voluntary family planning. Requests for family planning assistance are being made by the governments of most Third World countries, representing many faiths and cultures. The United States should continue to respond favorably to their requests. Development policies and programs must be designed to make smaller families a more attractive option. We should provide assistance not only through our bilateral programs, which have particular strengths in the improvement of family planning techniques and in service-delivery systems, but also through other donors, such as the World Bank and the United Nations Fund for Population Activities. World Bank President McNamara recently identified population growth as the most critical of all developmental problems.8 He called 8 The World Bank met in Belgrade, Yugoslavia, October 2–5, 1979; McNamara addressed the World Bank on October 2 and described population growth as the “gravest issue” for the upcoming decades. See Eric Bourne, “A McNamara plea for third world,” The Christian Science Monitor, October 3, 1979, p. 11 and Clyde H. Farnsworth, “U.S. May Increase Gold Sales: Plans to Help Dollar Studied at Belgrade,” The New York Times, October 3, 1979, p. D–1.
