108 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV look in 1990, the cruise missiles on B–52s would badly undercut the Soviet expenditure of 15 billion dollars a year on air defenses. Although cruise missiles do not add that much to existing bomber capability, a cruise missile force will be viable for a much longer period of time. In addition, cruise missiles on large cruise missile carriers would even further counter Soviet air defenses. Duncan said that in the future, we would become very dependent on Trident. Secretary Brown noted that we would also be dependent on getting within 2500 km of Soviet targets with ALCMs. Spurgeon Keeny noted that these developments did not increase our hard-­target capability but do increase our threat against the Soviet Union. David Aaron asked why we don’t think in terms of a five to six thousand mile cruise missile. Secretary Brown indicated that he had been looking at this option and had found that with a vehicle of about 50,000 pounds, you could deliver a few megatons to intercontinental ranges. Such a vehicle could virtually fit in a beer truck, but it is prohibited in the current Geneva Joint Draft Text. General Brown recalled that we had a couple of squadrons of intercontinental cruise missiles in Maine, the SNARK. [1 line not declassified] Secretary Brown indicated that this was just one of the number of new possibilities that should be looked at carefully and that by 1990 he thought we could come up with a number of new things of interest. David Aaron noted that in SALT, we were trying to get reductions and get control of new missile systems. Secretary Brown indicated that this was because of some concern about foreclosing options that could be of interest in the future. David Aaron noted that he was impressed by our ability to backtrack on such issues. Spurgeon Keeny said that we should look at SALT as a vehicle for limiting the threat to strategic systems. Secretary Brown noted there was a fundamental difference between the US and the Soviet Union with respect to the cruise missiles. The Soviet Union does not need cruise missiles, whereas the US needs cruise missiles as a way of negating Soviet air defense advantages; there was no particular advantage to the Soviets in putting cruise missiles on the Bison, the Bear, or the Backfire. He noted that improvements in command and control and targeting doctrine were also additional options for the 1980’s. He said that these issues were being studied in DOD, but that we would not try and subvert the process of interagency review of such issues. Bob Bowie noted that in the longer term, we should look at the potential for Soviet actions that could be of concern. Warren Christopher noted that from a foreign policy standpoint, that the State Department perceived some risk in moving from a Triad to a Dyad.
