316 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX affair. The Czechoslovak Government does not like interference in Czechoslovakia’s internal affairs. Johanes mentioned a number of letters he had recently received on behalf of a prisoner in Czechoslovakia serving a three-year sentence and wondered if this letter-writing campaign was not the concoction of persons interested in harming relations. 5. Vest noted that the signatories of the Final Act shared common objectives. When a country’s laws and practices conflict with these objectives, all signatories are properly concerned. Such conflicts in Czechoslovakia will entail certain consequences in the United States. The point is that the Czechoslovak Government must act with these consequences in mind. 6. Schneider supported Vest’s statement and added that the USG would be willing to examine closely any conflicts between its laws and practices and the Final Act which the Czechoslovak Government cared to raise. 7. Ambassador Johanes observed that none of the Charter 77 dissidents has been jailed for having signed the Charter or having exercised their right of free expression. If the Czechoslovak Government recently arrested some dissidents, they had violated the law. 8. Johanes said that the Final Act also provided for free trade, yet the US had not yet extended MFN tariff status to Czechoslovakia. The Final Act was intended to dispose of the remnants of World War II, yet the US still refused to return Czechoslovakia’s gold. Johanes added that the US Government maintains relations with many countries around the world which have poor human rights records, in many cases much worse than Czechoslovakia’s. 9. In response to Vest’s request, Johanes said he would inform the Czechoslovak Government of our protest and inquire about the arrests. 10. Action requested: The Ambassador should make an approach along the lines of the above to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.3 Christopher 3 Ambassador Meehan delivered the démarche to Jablonsky on June 13. Describing the meeting as “frank and brisk,” Meehan reported that Jablonsky began their discussions by rejecting Vest’s démarche to Ambassador Johanes, describing it as “an unsubstantiated attack and gross interference in [Czechoslovak] internal affairs.” Meehan reported that he stressed that “human rights is a key feature of our foreign policy and a matter of great concern to Congress and the public.” (Telegram 1958 from Prague, June 15; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790270–0556)
