861.77/3668: Telegram
[Document 494]
The Consul at Harbin (Hanson) to the Secretary of State
HARBIN, October 8, 1924—10 a.m.
[Received October 9—6:40 a.m.]
Since the Bolsheviks took over Chinese Eastern Railway, conservative
Russians in the railway zone have been terror stricken. On October 3rd
General Manager Ostroumoff, Chief of the Land Department Gondatti, and
Chief of the Economic Bureau Mikhailoff were arrested by Chinese police,
acting under orders from Mukden, without charges being preferred, placed
in solitary confinement, treated like desperate criminals and not permitted
to consult with the counsel or to see their wives. Arrests were made before
they were able legally to transfer their offices to their Soviet successors. On
October 6th Kirin provincial authorities prohibited departure of Russians
from Harbin. On October 7th a merchant, Gavriloff, and the chief
bookkeeper of the railway were arrested without charges made and placed
in prison. As the first three mentioned worked with and under Inter-Allied
Technical Board, as the first two were given American, British, French and
Japanese diplomatic support and encouragement in their efforts to resist
Chinese encroachments in the land department question, and as I suspect
that certain Chinese authorities with Bolshevik approval are attempting to
persecute them for attempting to preserve the interests of the railway in
accordance with the resolutions of the Washington Conference, it is my
opinion that the matter of these outrageous arrests and the conduct of these
railway officials while in charge of railway administration should be
investigated immediately by an international commission, if possible. If not
possible, then foreign consular officers should be present at the trials of the
accused.
This matter is urgent as Ostroumoff who has long been in ill health and
suffering from a severe strain may become seriously if not fatally ill in the
Chinese prison. It is suggested that pressure be brought upon Chang Tso-lin
to have the prisoners moved to Mukden because it is feared they may at any
