1955 529 384. Telegram 1215 from Geneva1 Geneva, November 23, 1955, midnight 1215. From Johnson. 1. I opened 27th meeting today with prepared statement on imple­ mentation as follows: A. Since our last meeting my government has received news that three of Americans held by your government are to be released; in fact, two of them have already left. Gratifying as this news is, fourteen Americans still remain in prison in your country. B. Not only have these fourteen Americans not yet been permit­ ted to exercise their right to return, but British Charge d’Affaires has not been able to carry out his functions under agreed announcement with respect to them. Thirteen of remaining fourteen have not yet been able to communicate with British Charge. Since your government bears responsibility for providing facilities for prisoners’ communication with British Charge, my government can only conclude that they are being prevented from communicating with him. It is obvious that any person confined to prison would seek to take full advantage of Charge’s efforts to remove impediments to freedom, if given opportunity. C. To best of my knowledge the office of British Charge has been able to visit only one of Americans. My government considers that requirement that Charge interview Americans only in accordance with rules for relatives is arbitrary and unreasonable, since Charge is an offi­ cial carrying out his duties and not relative. Requirements for visits would appear to be attempt to defeat purpose of agreed announce­ ment. There are no restrictions whatsoever on freedom of Chinese in US to communicate with Indian Embassy or on freedom of Indian Embassy to interview Chinese who appeal to it in accordance with agreed announcement. D. My government cannot accept contention of your Vice Minister of Foreign Affairs in his interview with UK Charge on November 14 that question of encountering obstructions in leaving country does not arise in cases of imprisoned Americans. Imprisonment is of itself incon­ trovertible evidence of obstructions to departure. Since more than two months have passed since your government pledged that Americans would be expeditiously permitted return, it apparent they are encoun­ tering obstructions in leaving. 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/11–2355. Confidential; Limited Distribution.
