3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–June 1979
617
vantage, he would have to say outright that such schemes would not
bring any benefit to the United States, but could inflict a great deal of
harm. China’s very first acts after normalization of relations with the
United States and Japan, particularly its aggression against Vietnam,
have graphically confirmed that a policy of smiles and bows in the di-
rection of the Chinese was totally unproductive, as demonstrated by
events in Kampuchea and by China’s cynical aggression against Viet-
nam. These were graphic examples of China’s policy when it felt it
could act from a position of strength. The Chinese leaders are given to
taking up arms very easily, pursuing their own designs and relegating
the United States to the doubtful role of covering their rear. Even now
connivance with China is turning into aggression against neighboring
states, and it is clear that China strives for complete hegemony in Asia.
Of course, the Soviet Union was quite capable of standing up for its
own interests, but could that also be said of India, Japan or the Philip-
pines, for example? What would happen if the Chinese obtain access to
Western markets, Western materiel and Western military technology?
And yet, some allies of the United States manifest a great deal of active
interest in providing China with such access, evidently with the ap-
proval of the United States. Furthermore, it should not be forgotten that
China is not bound by any international agreement relating to the limi-
tation of nuclear arms, although even now China had many such
weapons and also had good sources of primary materials.
Brezhnev said that he would not be frank with the President if he
were not to point out that future encouragement by the United States of
China’s hostile policy toward the Soviet Union would seriously aggra-
vate Soviet-American relations, not even to mention the fact that
headway in the area of limiting and reducing arms would become quite
impossible. In brief, as he saw it, U.S. policy toward China has now
reached a threshold beyond which it could only produce a drastic dete-
rioration of the entire international situation. Brezhnev expressed the
hope that Washington would not prompt events in that direction.
Brezhnev had another point to make in this connection. The Presi-
dent was surely aware of the fact that the Soviet Union consistently
pursues a policy of peace and cooperation with all states and therefore
was certainly in favor of normalizing relations with China. As the Pres-
ident probably knew, right now the government of China, after re-
peated proposals for normalization of relations by the Soviet side over
the past several years, has expressed its willingness to engage in negoti-
ations. The Soviet Union had agreed, although its leadership was not
too convinced of China’s sincerity. The Soviet Union will try to reach
agreement with China to put their mutual relations on an honest and
correct basis of mutual respect, sovereignty of each other’s territory,
non-use of force and non-interference in internal affairs. The Soviet
