International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977 141 40. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for Domestic Affairs and Policy (Eizenstat) and Robert Ginsburg of the Domestic Policy Staff to President Carter1 Washington, July 7, 1977 SUBJECT Adjustment Assistance Program for the Shoe Industry General Outline of the Program The Commerce Department has developed an adjustment assistance program for the shoe industry which has the following principal components: 1. Commerce will encourage the major domestic retailers (Sears, K Mart, etc.) to increase their purchases from the trade impacted shoe manufacturers. Commerce reports that the retailers have indicated their willingness to participate actively in such a program. 2. Approximately 20 specialist teams will be formed, drawn principally from the private sector, to assist the affected companies in modernization. 3. Financial support would be provided for education and training courses for prospective managers of shoe companies. 4. Financial support would be provided for increased advertising by the domestic industry. 5. Approximately $40 million in loans and loan guarantees would be made available for increased capital investment in the affected companies and for the purpose of facilitating the sale or merger of affected companies. The program is more fully described in the attached memorandum from Under Secretary Harman.2 The total cost for the three-year program would be approximately $60 million. No new legislation would be required. The general outline of the program has been approved by the EPG. There can never be certainty that any adjustment assistance program will work—it is extremely difficult to achieve a turnaround for a single company let alone a large number of companies in a declining industry. Nevertheless, against that background, we think that Commerce has designed a good program. Both the industry and the shoe unions support the program. 1 Source: National Archives, RG 364, 364–80–4, Special Trade Representative Subject Files, 1977–1979, Box 4, Footwear 1977. No classification marking. Ginsburg did not initial the memorandum. A stamped notation reads: “The President has seen.” 2 Not attached.
