1980 879 PD/NSC–533 directs that our C3I programs and our guidance to telecommunications common carriers support the development and maintenance of such capabilities. In addition, PD/NSC–414 directs that we seek greater continuity of government should deterrence fail. Implementation of PD/NSC–53 and PD/NSC–41 must be pursued in parallel with that of this employment directive. (C) The relationship of acquisition policy to employment policy. Our acquisition programs must be evaluated in terms of their support for the employment policy ordered by this directive. The required flexibility, survivability, endurance, and target destruction capability must be taken into account in developing programs for acquiring nuclear weapons systems, and their supporting C3I systems, needed to support our countervailing strategy. (S) Implementation. As new targeting capabilities are developed, and as our operational staffing support change to meet the foregoing directives, they must be reviewed and tested to validate their feasibility and soundness. For that purpose: —At least two exercises involving the National Command Authorities should be conducted each year to evaluate our capabilities and our employment doctrines. —Continued study and analysis of means to improve and refine our countervailing strategy of general conflict should be conducted by the Department of Defense. —The results of these exercises, studies and analysis will provide the bases for modification and any further development of employment and acquisition policy. —A report will be rendered to the President at least annually on our employment plans, including, but not limited to, on the size and capability of the reserve forces, the degree of flexibility available, limiting factors in achieving flexibility, and the status of programs to provide improvements. —Any change or new pre-­planned options will be submitted to the President for his review and approval, in accordance with current procedures. (TS) NSDM–2425 is superseded by this directive. (U) Jimmy Carter 3 See Document 165. 4 See Document 91. 5 See footnote 2, Document 29.
