more satisfactory document, from our point of view, had the original text of
the Economic Committee not only been adhered to but strengthened,
especially as to article 5. Also the further meeting which will take place in
the early summer of 1928 will be faced with a number of very thorny
questions; for example, the decision as to what states must ratify the
convention before it enters into effect. It is a pity that this decision had to be
deferred to a future date but there seemed no possibility of reaching a
solution until the convention was finally drawn up and until a full
knowledge was available of all the reservations that would form part of it.
Also the permission for states to introduce other reservations up to February
1st which may be discussed at this future conference may bring further
difficult questions, although urgent pleas were made in the conference and
the hope was expressed that the reservations should rather be reduced than;
increased by that time. The long delay which must elapse before the
convention can be effective (at the earliest this can hardly take place before
the summer of 1929) is also a source of regret. However, this is somewhat
mitigated by the fact that a signatory power undertakes not to increase its
prohibitions or restrictions during this period.
As opposed to these weaknesses there would appear to be certain
advantages which would accrue to the United States if it participated in this
treaty. In spite of the many reservations, there will be, if the treaty goes into
force, an enormous number of prohibitions and restrictions abolished. The
reservations do not appear to be of such a nature that they greatly affect the
trade of the United States, whereas many of the restrictions that will be
dropped in favor of signatory states do so affect our trade very seriously.
Should the Government of the United States decide that this treaty should
be signed I call attention to the fact that it would be well if this decision
were taken before the 1st of February 1928, since states signing the treaty
after that date may not present reservations under article 6.27 While many of
the delegates held that our prohibition of export of helium is adequately
covered in article 4, paragraph 2, there were others who took a contrary
view. I consider it advisable, therefore, in the event that we do sign, that we
should make a definite reservation regarding helium and not be put on the
defensive in the future regarding our maintenance of this prohibition.
