428 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII the Gaullists in view of next year’s presidential elections, cannot afford to provoke their criticism by taking measures against the Soviets in obvious deference to US wishes; he must maintain a certain distance from US policies. Apart from such domestic considerations, the French government believes that it retains a “special relationship” with the Soviet Union which it would be extremely reluctant to jeopardize. The French have worked especially hard to win Soviet support for the French proposal for a Conference on European Disarmament, and they are most unlikely to take actions that would undermine that effort. Italy has an interest in supporting US measures against the Soviet Union in order to preserve the status it has lately won in the Alliance for backing theater nuclear force modernization and to enhance its role as EC President and Venice Summit host in the coming months. But the government is especially vulnerable to Soviet economic pressures and inducements—in particular the Soviets are an important natural gas supplier for Italy—and the Italians would press hard for compensation for any costs it might incur in supporting US actions. Domestically, a climate of hostility between the superpowers places the Italian government in an awkward position because of its need for some degree of political cooperation from the Italian Communist Party. Thus, some Italians would be tempted to minimize the crisis, but many others would view it as an opportunity to push the PCI back into a quasiillegitimate status. West Germany clearly has the most to fear from revived US-Soviet tension. It is most directly vulnerable to Soviet pressures—for example in Berlin—and it has won, correspondingly, the greatest direct benefits from detente. Chancellor Schmidt’s own Social Democratic Party initiated West Germany’s reconciliation with the Soviets—the Ostpolitik— and has pursued and defended it for more than a decade. The Chancellor must demonstrate enough firmness against the Soviets in crisis to escape unfavorable comparison with his rival in this fall’s elections, the conservative Franz Josef Strauss. But at the same time he cannot afford to abandon detente in Europe—and thus the prospects for some continuing improvement in inner-German relations in particular— unless he has no other option. To do so would risk splitting his party, whose vocal left wing prizes detente especially highly. It could also severely strain his close relationship with French President Giscard. The West Germans might well contribute to a stronger Western position in Southwest Asia but they will try to protect their hard-won reconciliation with the Soviets and Eastern Europe—especially East Germany. Under these conditions, most Europeans will certainly hesitate to reinforce East-West tension. They will try instead to limit and confine it, to ensure that detente in Europe is not damaged at the core. They may be tempted to view their proper role as that of mediator between
