National Security Policy 1151 high assurance levels, the flat part of the curve is reached and it is a question of how high you should go on assurance for the most import­ ant targets. [text not declassified] These are things that are going to have to be studied in great detail by the staffs and the JCS will have to write new instructions regarding assurance in the next couple of months. There seemed to be general agreement except for the Air Force people that our assurance criteria are now probably too high or perhaps the assurance on the various types of targets is not proper now. However, this is not a fatal defect in this first plan. d. Damage Criteria. Damage criteria [text not declassified] damage criteria. The JCS will also have to examine the damage criteria and the way the damage crite­ ria are applied to various types of targets in order to ensure targets that have to be destroyed are really destroyed once instead of several times. The methods of computing damage will probably have to be reviewed too. It may be that severe and moderate if not the proper way of doing it because the photographs of what moderate damage was, looked to be pretty severe. [text not declassified] As I stated, this is an area in which the JCS will have to lay out in greater detail the damage criteria to be used in the development of the next plan. e. Follow-­on Forces. The SIOP as developed utilized all of the committed forces which, of course, was entirely within the ground rules which were given to the DSTPS. However, there is considerable question as to whether all of these forces are, in fact, required and whether or not it would be advis­ able to withhold some forces for contingency operations following the initial attack. This naturally relates back to the size of the NSTL, the assurance of delivery, damage criteria also the survivability of launch bases. f. Constraints. The plan was juggled several times in preparation and weight of weapons and types of delivery were adjusted so as to bring the fallout at selected check points down within the levels prescribed in JCS guid­ ance. [text not declassified] This whole problem is urgently in need of attention. g. Base Survivability. The problem of survivability of the various types of bases, both fixed and mobile, was only superficially addressed in the prepara­ tion of this plan and it is evident that we must develop adequate fac­ tors for considering this problem. Base survivability naturally has a marked effect on force levels and types of forces for the future. Base
