500.A 4 e/412: Telegram
[Document 706]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, October 17, 1925—7 p.m.
[Received October 17—3:41 p.m.]
449. My telegram number 388 September 10, 11 a.m.
1. It would appear that no such definite program as outlined paragraph 4 has
been adopted. Various members Chinese commission have from time to time
intimated their desire to talk over confidentially with me in advance the
conference plans of the Government but up to the present time have either
postponed actual discussion or spoken in obviously evasive generalities. It
seems clear that the Government is still undecided upon its course of action.
2. From reliable informants in intimate relations with the Ministry Finance I
learn that the financial authorities of the Government are wholly skeptical of
the practicability of proposals for so-called tariff autonomy and regard as the
crux of the problem the possibility of inducing the powers to consent to
interim surtax of 5 percent instead of 2½ provided by the treaty. Could they
obtain this they would propose to use entire revenues from this surtax as the
basis for a loan, bulk of which would be devoted to the funding of unsecured
foreign and domestic debts and the balance to (a) preparations for the
abolition of likin, (b) administration purposes and (c) constructive purposes.
Apparently the measures contemplated under (a) would consist of
experiments in arrangements with various provinces for the abandonment of
internal taxation on the movement of trade in return for a subsidy out of the
customs surtax revenues; and the constructive measures contemplated would
not consist in the building of railways or similar undertaking but in carrying
out of ordinary functions of government now neglected because of lack of
funds.
3. These plans of the financial authorities evidently represent what the
administration in power would desire to obtain for itself from the conference
with a view to rehabilitating its credit deficiencies, consolidating its tenure of
power and for that purpose realistically accepting comparatively slight
immediate advantage in preference to any prospects of more far-reaching
better success in the future. These wholly practical purposes of the financial
authorities are sharply contested by the diplomatic and political elements
