1106  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
7. The Soviets agreed to one meter wide personnel exits at facilities 
subject to continuous monitoring. We agreed to two road exits.
8. I agreed to the following package deal:
A. Mandatory extension of baseline and new facility inspections 
of road mobile bases to allow time to complete the inspection. (our 
position)
B. No requirement to split into subgroups for baseline and new 
facility inspections of road mobile bases. (our position)
C. Verification that one silo at a test range, chosen from among 
those declared to be empty, actually is empty. (their position)
D. If there are no ICBMs at a base and a side elects to inspect any-
way during RVOSI, it counts as against the annual quota. (their posi-
tion, but trivial)
E. Use of GPS to verify positions during RVOSI, using the precau-
tions we proposed in June. (our position)
F. Annual quotas of 15 data update inspections, three formerly 
declared facility inspections and ten reentry vehicle inspections, with 
no increase for downloading.
G. PPCM starts 30 days (instead of the 45 they wanted) after entry 
into force. (our position, but trivial)
H. Six day separation between START inspections and INF inspec-
tions at the same SS–25 base. (basically their position, although they 
wanted 12 days)
I. No separation between two START inspection or two INF inspec-
tions at the same SS–25 base. (our position)
J. No counting a single inspection at the same SS–25 base under 
both START and INF. (our position)
9. For Steve Steiner. Six day separation between START inspections 
and INF inspections at the same SS–25 base isn’t as bad as you think. 
START limits us to two inspections a year at any one base. Thus the 
maximum a base could be sheltered from inspection is 12 days a year 
if we do multiple inspections at one base, which, with 15 quotas for 75 
facilities, we probably won’t do. Getting GPS and adequate time for 
road-mobile baseline seemed worth it.
10. Gary Curtin has asked for updated technical data for annex F of 
the MOU. Need it ASAP.
11. Rapid turnaround of informal guidance requests has been a big 
help and a big morale booster.
12. Overall situation: Soviets (and most of us) stunned by thought 
of finishing in 13 days. Soviets saying the right things, but not clear 
they can move paper fast enough. More when we know more.
Brooks
