Colonel Peel announced that at least some of the foreign Delegates could
not agree to the resolution as submitted by Dr. Wang without referring it to
their governments and going through the whole process of ratification
because they were not authorized to go that far. What he wished to do, and
what some of the other Delegations wished to do, notably the American
Delegation, was to implement the Washington Treaty, but he understood
that the Chinese Delegation, and possibly some other Delegations, were not
anxious for these surtaxes to be levied at once. He proposed the following
declaration in the preamble of the instrument authorizing the levying of
these surtaxes:
“The Delegations of the Contracting Powers, other than China,
having declared their intention to recommend to their respective
governments the immediate adoption of a treaty which shall
recognize the principle of China’s right to enjoy Tariff Autonomy,
and China having declared her intention to abolish likin, it is
agreed that the treaties shall provide that China’s National Tariff
Law shall come into effect upon the abolition of likin.”
Colonel Peel believed that these surtaxes, which they were authorized to
impose, should not come into force until the signature of the new Treaty.
Admitting that he did not know the exact meaning of the word “likin”,
Colonel Peel stated that he wished to guard his Delegation against accepting
a Chinese word, of the exact meaning of which he was not sure. Dr Wang
did not agree with the form of the declaration offered by Colonel Peel, and
Mr. MacMurray, in discussing the Chinese declaration, said that it went not
only beyond the powers of the American Delegation as negotiators, but
beyond the powers of even the American Chief Executive. Since it involved
a power which could be exercised only by the President, by and with the
advice and consent of the Senate, it would be quite impossible for the
American Delegates to accede to the resolution in the form proposed by the
Chinese. It would be worse than useless and the American Delegation was
therefore disposed to accept the British proposal which embodied the same
purport, but in a form which fell within the scope of the powers of the
American Delegation. If the Chinese were not satisfied it was suggested
that a drafting committee could quite readily iron out the difficulties and the
2½ per cent and 5 per cent surtax agreement would be effectuated. Dr.
