1458  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
In the course of a year there are approximately 100 natural events 
which, with present detection systems, would not be distinguishable 
from a [text not declassified]—20 or 30 of them in the Soviet-­Sino bloc.
The Geneva report says that inspection groups investigating a sus­
pected nuclear explosion would be provided with equipment and appa­
ratus “appropriate to its task.” What the report does not say is that such 
instruments do not now exist. The only way to prove an event to have 
been of a nuclear character is to locate radioactivity. In such a case the 
detection machinery would have been effective only with respect to an 
area 10 × 10 miles, and a detection been would then have to seek the 
specific radioactive area and the precise locale of the shot. (Dr. Teller’s 
estimate is that for an underground shot, drilling would be required and 
the chances of success on any one drill-hole would be about 1 in 40,000.)
If one is thinking in terms of [text not declassified] the number of 
such events in the course of a year is about [text not declassified] in the 
Sino-­Soviet bloc. This, from the point of view of sheer members, would 
present a physical impossibility to inspection teams.
In the matter of underground testing, there is some reason to 
believe that it is more difficult to detect an underground explosion if 
it is fired in hard rock, unlike the test conditions at the Nevada Test 
Site. Also, it is believed that an appropriate structure around the devise 
could, in effect, decouple the transmission of shock waves to the earth.
Dr. Teller believes that a series of underground tests, [text not 
declassified] progressively pursued, could enable the development of 
weapons of increasing yield without the great risk of detection. Thus, 
Dr. Teller believes that the largest loophole in the test control system 
developed at the Geneva meeting is the [text not declassified] especially 
involving experimentation with decoupling. He feels that this loophole 
is so great as to eliminate fears about loopholes arising from the reser­
vation of explosions for peaceful purposes.
[text not declassified]
4. Generally, underwater shots can be detected with effort and if one 
is willing to spend the sums of money involved for patrol ships, etc. As 
far as ocean shots are concerned, whether atmospheric or underwater, 
they probably can be detected and indentified but it is very difficult to 
prove the source. In other words, if there were a test moratorium and if 
there were an ocean shot, the Soviets could have been responsible but 
could seek to place responsibility upon the U.S. with very little possi­
bility on our part of disproving the charge. If the shot were under 1 KT 
it would be very difficult to detect and identify.
5. High-­altitude Tests. At Geneva it was agreed that no known sys­
tem can detect and identify shots above 70 miles (the U.S. has now had 
25 and 50 mile tests). However, the use of a number of satellites could 
detect radiation. High-­altitude testing was not seriously discussed 
at Geneva and two methods of evasion of detection are: one, testing
