1956  645
53. I said that I entirely disagreed and that unless we both here 
were willing together to work things out, I did not see how it was pos­
sible to reach agreement. Negotiation was not a matter of unilateral 
concessions, it was a matter of attempts to reach common agreements. 
I had, with these few minor changes, accepted form and words of 
their draft. This contrasted strongly with their refusal to accept my 
­November 10 draft even as basis of discussion. As I saw it, principal 
question between us was whether there should be any mention of indi­
vidual and collective self defense in any agreement. I had tried to do so 
in manner agreeable to them. I had expressed willingness to consider 
any other formula that they considered would better fit their position. 
It was hard for me to see how I could go further.
54. Wang said his points had also been made clear. He could go no 
further than that.
55. I said that it did not seem that any further discussion today was 
useful. I had nothing further on this if he had not.
56. Wang said he had made his position very clear on this matter.
57. I then said if agreeable to Wang I would turn to other subject. 
I read prepared statement on implementation as fols:
In previous meetings, I have frequently stated my belief that two 
of us here ought to be prepared to bring up and discuss frankly any 
questions which may arise as to implementation agreed announcement 
September 10. I held this opinion because of my conviction that by so 
doing we could best iron out differences of opinion, and contribute to 
speedy and faithful implementation our agreement. This, I felt, would 
aid progress talks with respect other items as well.
A. It was, of course, not my intention that two of us should 
attempt to go beyond provisions agreed announcement, nor to reopen 
issues which were discussed and settled before issuance September 10 
announcement. I have, for example, avoided bringing up for discussion 
here cases of Americans in your country where there was no evidence 
desire return. I have carefully confined my remarks to those cases cov­
ered by agreed announcement, that is, Americans who clearly desire 
return and who have not yet been permitted to do so in accordance 
with terms September 10 announcement, and to those cases where UK 
repeat UK Charge has encountered difficulty or obstruction in carrying 
out his clearly defined functions.
B. Recently I have noted your official organs again appear publicly 
and otherwise to be attempting through an involved process of reason­
ing to create false impression Americans remaining in prison your coun­
try are not covered by agreed announcement. We have here discussed 
this subject at great length and I had hoped had arrived at understand­
ing in this regard. I simply want again to repeat my government most 
emphatically cannot agree with statements of your government in this
