Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks
141
Reinforcing the USSR’s “Superpower” Status. As demonstrated in the
recent series of manned Soviet space flights involving nationals from
various “socialist” countries (including most recently a Vietnamese
cosmonaut), the USSR sees its space program serving important polit-
ical as well as technical military purposes. The bilateral nature and
highly technical subject of the ASAT talks underscore the “super-
power” status of the USSR and its image as an equal of the United
States. (In arguing that they cannot accept a test suspension that would
affect only their ASAT interceptor program, the Soviets have main-
tained that the provision must “look” good as well as be good.) These
same features of the talks, the Soviets hope, will serve to remind the
United States that it must look to the USSR—not to China or other
powers—for resolution of certain critical security problems. [handling
restriction not declassified]
Maintaining the Arms Control Dialogue. The Soviets almost surely
view ASAT negotiations as a useful part of the overall arms control dia-
logue with the United States. Aside from its indirect contributions to
the overall economic and political relationship, the entire arms control
process, including ASAT, contributes a measure of predictability to the
Soviet security environment. In a period when the centerpiece of the di-
alogue, SALT, is in trouble, and when the overall strategic arms compe-
tition appears to be increasing, talks on other questions such as theater
nuclear forces or ASAT are seen by the Soviets as a means of keeping
the dialogue from languishing. [Classification not declassified]
Outlook
The Soviets would welcome resumption of the talks and probably
still actively desire a bilateral ASAT accord. They probably feel that
their private inquiries in late 1979 and early 1980, combined with their
public call for resumption of interrupted talks, remain sufficient indica-
tions of their interest. [handling restriction not declassified]
The Soviets probably realize that alterations in their positions on
some of the unresolved issues will be necessary. The most likely area
for change is the test suspension. The current Soviet position on this
issue, which addresses “any means” of damaging, destroying, or
changing the trajectory of a space object, was probably adopted to
counter and perhaps even to remove what they regarded as a one-sided
US position. They seemed taken aback when told that this position
would limit some of their own current systems used for, or in support
of, manned missions (i.e. Salyut, Soyuz, Progress). A long-term test sus-
pension, combined with an exception for manned or reusable systems,
might come to be viewed in Moscow as suited to the Soviet aim of con-
straining the long-term, potential, US ASAT threat. Even if a long-term
suspension could not be agreed upon, the Soviets might still hope that
such a proposal would cause the United States to drop its insistence on
