Chapter 3, June 1989–January 1990 327 Data Denial 20. Regarding the non-­encryption of telemetry, in his opening remarks Nazarkin said the Soviet side had studied the U.S. draft agreement handed over in Geneva and thought agreement was possible based on that document. There was one consideration, regarding the length of time the agreement would be in force: the Soviet side thought this agreement could be used not only to resolve this issue prior to signing the START Treaty, but even afterwards. The Soviet side proposed to solve the problem entirely. Thus, Nazarkin said, this agreement could remain in force in parallel with the future START Treaty and thus this issue would be closed; there would be no further complications in the START talks concerning this issue. Nazarkin said he would provide further details later regarding Soviet views on these issues. 21. Regarding telemetry encryption and means of impeding the broadcast of telemetry, Burt said he was encouraged by Nazarkin’s statement indicating that the Soviet side was ready to enter an agreement. He noted that Nazarkin had raised the issue of the agreement’s duration. There were two factors: first, the Soviet side was proposing an agreement of indefinite duration, yet the sides had not yet addressed the question of the duration of the START Treaty itself. Burt asked the Soviet side to clarify its position. Secondly, Burt said, there was a need to clarify whether any agreement made now could be further improved or otherwise changed in the final START Treaty. If the sides signed it now, Burt said, they might close off options of making improvements in the final START Treaty. These were trial arrangements; the goal was to learn from them. Burt suggested this subject be discussed further in the subgroup. 22. Nazarkin confirmed that the Soviet side sought to make the agreement on non-­encryption of telemetry of unlimited duration. Nazarkin said he saw reason in what Burt had said concerning the need to be consistent with the START Treaty, on which the sides had not yet agreed on duration. However, he thought that in their agreement on telemetry the sides should resolve the entire issue. 23. Burt asked whether, after signing of the data denial agreement but before the conclusion of the START Treaty, a side would have the right to propose a change. Burt explained that the U.S. side saw this measure as a trial, and wanted to preserve the option to improve upon it in the START Treaty. He asked whether this could be done under the Soviet approach. 24. Nazarkin said Burt was correct in distinguishing between the U.S. and Soviet approaches. The Soviet side wanted to change the U.S. proposal on telemetry from a trial measure to a measure fully in force; thus it would be possible to eliminate one of the difficulties the sides
