288  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
invite Dobrynin onto this question to talk about it. You could extend 
an invitation to Dobrynin and General Secretary Gorbachev would 
instruct Dobrynin to come talk about it, or we could invite one of your 
representatives.
Lt Gen Scowcroft: I think that would be a good way to keep it close 
to our leaders and away from our systems. We’d figure out a cover.
Marshal Akhromeyev: What would be a timetable for the next talks?
Lt Gen Scowcroft: I think we need a couple of months. I’d like to 
wait for our defense budget to be approved. It’s important to have 
something to negotiate. In a couple of months we could easily commu-
nicate back and forth. I have one question: What is your notion of all 
land-­based MIRV ballistic missiles.
Marshall Akhromeyev: Most of your ballistic missiles are on subma-
rines. Ours are in land-­based silos. We talked on ceilings in December 
1987. We agreed to be ready to cut SS–18s by 50%. Very tough debating 
proceeded the agreement. We are aware that these are missiles especially 
troubling the U.S. We agreed not to develop new types of ICBMs and 
only to modernize 50% of the remaining ICBMs. I believe that is where 
we should start. If we do away with SS–18s completely, we would be 
undermining our strategic potential. It would not be equitable.
Lt Gen Scowcroft: It’s an interesting point. What does moderniza-
tion mean? You describe it as improving combat capability. The MX–1 
called for modernization.
Marshal Akhromeyev: These specifics should be agreed upon at 
negotiations. Modernization means the same number of warheads, the 
same characteristics as understood at SALT—­thrust, size, fuel tonnage, 
etc. It would be subject to strict verification.
Lt Gen Scowcroft: We need improvements over the SALT stipulation.
Admiral Crowe: SS–18 warheads are a concern.
Marshal Akhromeyev: Hypothetically, we would expand the num-
ber of warheads. We do have concerns for ourselves, to include bomber 
ALCM counting rules.
Admiral Crowe: I agree, it’s a very thorny issue.
Marshal Akhromeyev: I cannot imagine a situation in which the 
USSR would agree to completely eliminate SS–18s.
Admiral Crowe: This is extreme. Our Navy would say that it cannot 
eliminate SLCMs.
Marshal Akhromeyev: I understand that it is a delicate problem.
Admiral Crowe: Anything now is imaginable.
Marshal Akrhomeyev: We do not wish to exercise pressure.
Lt Gen Scowcroft: We might think about the possibility of modern-
ization of land-­based ballistic missiles and freezing the deployment
