1979 659 and that it would be very important to make a strong presentation of this decision. Finally, he remarked that he feels at ease with the decision to go ahead with a full size MX in the land-­based mode. In response to Dr. Brzezinski’s suggestions, the President instructed everyone not to brief anyone outside this room on this decision. However, the President went on to say he wants the republic to know of this decision before the Summit. (C) Dr. Brzezinski said that it was important to announce this decision soon, and suggested that it should be done before the end of the week. There were several comments to the effect that the decision should be announced before there was much chance of its leaking to the press. Dr. Brzezinski continued that the announcement should not be too close to the Summit, where it may seem heavy handed. (There were a number of jocular remarks about the possibility of combining the announcement with announcements on Rhodesia and health care, and perhaps having the MX decision announced by Secretary Califano.) Dr. Brzezinski asked those assembled to send in their contributions on how to present the decision. He told the President he would try to have a package assembled by the next evening. (C) The President said that we should list all the points bearing on the decision and base all our arguments on hard facts. He also said that he would need a specific plan on how to approach the Senate. The President also asked if any of the principals would have to seek help in making the preparations he had requested—­help from people or subordinates not currently in the room—­the principals all said no. (U) Secretary Brown asked how we were going to approach resolution of the basing issue. The President responded that it would have to be resolved before the SALT vote. Secretary Brown answered: perhaps even earlier, perhaps before the debate. The President commented that it will help to know the reactions of some of the more influential Senators, such as Nunn, Culver, and Glenn. (C) General Jones noted that while he needn’t tell any one about this decision, he would like to be able to tell his colleagues before any Senators became aware of the decision, and he was told that this would be possible. (U) Jody Powell asked if the President’s decision should be considered tentative, pending receipt of the material that he had requested. The President agreed and the meeting was adjourned. (U)
