commerce and industry of all nations throughout the territory of
China;
(4) To refrain from taking advantage of conditions in China in
order to seek special rights or privileges which would abridge the
rights of subjects or citizens of friendly States, and from
countenancing action inimical to the security of such States.”
The Treaty in relation to the Chinese tariffs in substance provided for a certain revision
of the duties, which has already taken place,34 and for the calling of a special
conference on the question of abolition of likin, a local transportation tax in China, and
granting in lieu thereof certain additional surtaxes to China. This convention was to be
called within three months after the ratification of the treaty by all the Powers. These
treaties were made in February 1922. They have been ratified by all the Powers and
came into force on August 5, 1925, by the deposit on that day of the ratifications with
the Department of State in Washington. Resolution V of the Washington Conference,
provided in substance that within three months after the adjournment of the
Conference, the participating Powers should establish a Commission, to which each
Government should appoint one member, to inquire into the present practice of
extraterritorial jurisdiction in China and into the laws, judicial system, and methods of
judicial administration of China with a view to reporting to the Governments of the
several Powers their findings of fact in regard to these matters and their
recommendations as to such means as they may find suitable to improve existing
conditions of administration of justice in China and to assist and further the efforts of
the Chinese Government to effect such legislation and judicial reforms as would
warrant the several Powers in relinquishing, either progressively or otherwise, their
respective rights of extraterritoriality. The appointment of these delegates to the
Conference should have been made in May 1922 but China requested a postponement
of one year. All the Powers agreed to a postponement but it proved impossible to obtain
any unanimity on the part of the Powers as to a new date and no date has ever been
fixed. China now asks for the execution of these treaties and resolutions and, in
addition, demands that the various Powers take up with China a general revision of the
treaties to the end that ultimately the conventional tariff may be abolished and
extraterritorial rights given up.
The Washington Treaty between the nine Powers relating to Chinese Customs tariff
having been ratified by all the Powers and ratifications exchanged in Washington on
August 5, 1925, that Treaty came into force and the Special Conference has been called
to meet in Peking on October 26, 1925. The United States has appointed as its
representatives John V. A. MacMurray, American Minister to China, and Silas H.
Strawn, a lawyer of Chicago. The Treaty provides for a Special Conference to prepare
the way for putting into effect the provisions of previous treaties whereby China agreed
to abolish likin and the Powers, in return, consent to an increase in the tariff duties.
