538 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX alleged killing of woman by Ceausescu motorcade. Nicolae maintained this report was false. Continuing his lengthy rebuttal (partly in Romanian), Nicolae touched on US press reports that Romanian people are being forced to work weekends; reference to “concentration camps” in Romania (by which he presumably meant short article which referred to “labor camps”); RFE broadcasting of Goma’s telephone number; and US emphasis on specific human rights cases, as opposed to general principles. Thrust of his presentation was that in order to meet development goals, which are precondition for Romania’s ability to deal equal terms with other countries, including “Socialist” ones, GOR must act very prudently in mobilizing population. By implication, US is making internal discipline more difficult to maintain. Further, Romania cannot accept any interference in internal affairs. Which can take various forms and be interpreted in different ways by different countries (i.e. USSR).4 Keeping in mind Romania’s geographic position, Romanian leadership remains confident but must also be prudent. 4. In part of conversation he emphasized was “unofficial,” Nicolae said he knew something about Ton’s status but not the others mentioned. Ton, he said, had done something “very bad for relations between the Romanian Baptist Church and the Romanian authorities”: he sent a letter to RFE “explaining various cases.” Other Romanian Baptists, not the GOR, had removed Ton as pastor in Ploiesti for this reason. However, Ton is at present not rpt not under arrest; he is being allowed to conduct religious services at “some churches” in Bucharest. Nicolae also stressed the general point that if some persons had been arrested in Romania, which was possible, it was because they had clearly violated Romanian law by doing something more than simply criticizing GOR, which was not illegal. Therefore, such arrests were an internal matter, not a proper subject for international debate. 5. Counselor responded that US also recognizes need to be prudent in these matters and sympathizes to some extent with problem Romania faces. We are not attempting to interfere in Romania’s domestic affairs, nor are we discussing the legal aspects of the cases mentioned; rather, our concern is with the possible problem in our relations caused by arrests of persons for supporting Helsinki principles or for religious activity. US press is not controlled by anyone; general earthquake coverage was highly sympathetic. Perhaps GOR is too sensitive about press items. On other hand, deliberate selection of negative items about 4 In a March 7 intelligence information cable, the CIA reported that, in late February, the Romanian Foreign Ministry instructed all Romanian missions abroad not to issue visas to U.S. legislators unless authorized by the Foreign Ministry and refrain from any contact with U.S. Senators investigating human rights issues. (National Archives, RG 59, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Office of Analysis for the Commonwealth and Eastern Europe, Office Subject Files, 1965–1980, Lot 92D412, Box 2, Romania-US (General))
