1432  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
of international relations. He did not see any reason why our side should 
continue to object to it.
3. Wang continued. Let us take the question of returning civilians. 
His side has faithfully carried out the agreement of September 10, 1955 
while my side has not, thus violating the principle of reciprocity. Now 
all those ordinary American nationals in China who desire to return 
have left. Even among the American prisoners, 34 have been released in 
advance or at the expiration of their terms. Yet Chinese in the U.S. who 
desire to return continue to encounter obstacles and persecution so that 
many cannot return. Nor do those Chinese prisoners in the U.S. enjoy 
similar lenient treatment as do those U.S. prisoners in China.
4. Wang continued. Next he wanted to take up the visits of news­
paper correspondents. Last year his government took the initiative 
in admitting American correspondents. All those who wanted to do 
so did not succeed in coming due to obstructions placed by the U.S. 
Government. Three went and they succeeded in completing their 
­coverage. On this score the U.S. has again failed to observe the principle 
of reciprocity. On August 22 my government had announced permis­
sion for American correspondents to enter China but flagrantly refused 
to announce permission for Chinese correspondents. The draft agree­
ment introduced by his side at the last meeting called for reciprocity for 
newsmen to come and visit on a reciprocal basis. This was rejected by 
my side.
5. Wang continued by saying that on relations between China and 
the U.S. and on such concrete matters as cultural exchanges, human con­
tacts, and visits of newspapermen, our side has violated the principles 
of equality and reciprocity, thus showing contempt of the principles in 
international relations. They consider that in Sino-American relations no 
question can be settled if one departs from this principle. In this respect 
they have consistently insisted on equality and reciprocity, and they res­
olutely demand that our side subscribe to this principle. Otherwise their 
side cannot unilaterally undertake commitments.
6. Wang continued. With regard to the renunciation of force, his 
position has always been that the relaxation of tension in the Taiwan 
area constitutes one of the vital aspects in the improvement of relations 
between China and America. Previously they had dealt at great length 
on the importance of this issue. The fact before us is that the Chinese 
territory of Taiwan is under the direction of the U.S. and peace in the Far 
East is disturbed by the attitude of the U.S. Government. His side has 
repeatedly put forward their views with regard to how this ­situation 
can effectively be resolved. It is now up to the U.S. to put forward con­
crete opinions if the U.S. is genuinely willing to respect the sovereignty 
of China and genuinely desires to contribute to peace in the Far East.
7. I replied. He had again this morning as in the past spoken 
much of the terms equality and mutual benefit and reciprocity. I told
