March–August 1953
599
(H) What action, if any, should the U.S. Government take to
increase Iran’s diplomatic and commercial relations with West
Germany?14
It is GTI’s recommendation that the Bonn Government be encour-
aged to establish diplomatic and commercial offices in Iran?15
(I) Should additional efforts be made to strengthen Iran’s military
establishment with the objective of increasing its political importance
and position in the national economy?16
It is GTI’s recommendation that the present objectives of our mili-
tary aid program in Iran, aiming at technical standards of equipment
and training for the Iranian army, should be broadened to allow our
military aid to seek to increase the political importance of Iran’s armed
forces and their position in the national economy.17
14 In a memorandum to Byroade, June 11, Richards explained that Iran–West
German trade had increased in the last year despite the oil dispute with Great Britain.
“This trade not only strengthens Iran’s ties with non-communist areas but siphons off
trade which might otherwise go towards the communist bloc.” (National Archives, RG
59, GTI Files, Lot 57 D 155, Box 41)
15 To the left of this paragraph in the margin is the handwritten word “Yes.”
16 In a memorandum to Byroade, June 11, Richards wrote that the military in Iran
“is being reduced in strength and prestige by Dr. Mosadeq and is being infiltrated by
communist agitators.” The Defense Department intended to reduce military aid to Iran in
FY 1954, but Henderson and McClure “have already suggested certain measures which
might be taken to broaden the type of military aid presently being given. These and other
ideas for broadening the objectives of US military aid to Iran can be studied in Wash-
ington, if the policy decision is made that it is in the US interest to work towards a restora-
tion of the Iranian Army’s political position in Iran.” (National Archives, RG 59, GTI
Files, Lot 57 D 155, Box 41)
17 To the left of this paragraph in the margin is the handwritten word “Yes.” In a
memorandum to Acting Near East and Africa Division Chief [name not declassified] of the
Directorate of Plans, June 12, Waller commented on the above questions and recommen-
dations made by GTI. He grouped questions A through E as “part A,” and questions F
through I as “part B.” After reviewing GTI’s recommendations in part A, recommen-
dations, he wrote, that “if accepted, would reverse American policy toward Mossadeq as
stated by Under Secretary of State Smith,” Waller also warned that the recommendations
“would prolong Mossadeq’s tenure of office. Furthermore, latter recommendations
would make Project TPAJAX inoperable but also inconsistent with national policy.”
(Central Intelligence Agency, DDO Files, Job 80–01701R, Box 3, Folder 7, TPAJAX Vol. I)
