562 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I We must continue to protect our own and our allies’ interests. We are strengthening our forces in Europe. We are improving our ability to speed additional ground and air forces in the event of a crisis. And our European allies, who provide most of NATO’s combat forces, are steadily improving their forces’ readiness and effectiveness. But it is the awesome power of our nuclear weapons that I want to emphasize this afternoon. Many of you here today remember the shuddering reality of our first atomic bomb. Today, the United States has over 20,000 nuclear weapons. • Each warhead on one of our Poseidon missiles is two times more destructive than the atomic bombs dropped on Hiroshima and Nagasaki. One Poseidon submarine carries more than 140 warheads. Each Poseidon can deliver more destructive force than all the bombs—nuclear and conventional—that were dropped during World War II. We have 31 of these Poseidon submarines. • More than half of our 1,000 Minuteman missiles are equipped with multiple independently-targetable reentry vehicles (MIRV’s)— which enable one rocket to carry a number of warheads and thus strike at several different targets. Each of the Minuteman warheads carries eight times the force of the first atomic bomb. And soon we will double that destructive power. We have 348 heavy bombers which can carry 2,000 megatons of total power. Let me illustrate what that means. If every car of a train that extended from Minneapolis to Winona5 were filled with TNT and blown up, that would be one megaton. I cite these facts to give you a sense of the enormous scale—and the great diversity—of America’s nuclear strength. The Soviets, of course, also have a large arsenal. But the factor that keeps us at peace is not simply what each of us has; it is whether there is any possibility that a nuclear attack on us or our allies would not mean massive destruction for the Soviets. Let me take the worst case. It is possible that, in the early to mid- 1980’s, the Soviets—with a surprise attack—could destroy most of our land-based missiles while keeping a large number of their missiles in reserve. In doing so, they also must consider the grim possibility that we would have already launched our missiles before theirs arrived. The possibility, even theoretical, that our missiles would be vulnerable is something we are working very hard to avoid. But even if our land-based missiles were vulnerable to a surprise attack, we could still totally destroy the Soviet Union as a viable society 5 Approximately 100 miles.
