204
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
duced to one plank—oil.39 The propaganda of the National Front, both
as a Parliamentary minority and as a Government, has depended on
this theme and, without a similarly simple, emotion-charged appeal, no
opposition has been able to succeed.
Control The familiar military trappings of a police state are lacking
in Iran today, but Mosadeq, when crossed, acts as tyrannically as any
dictator, using popular excitement and gangs of thugs to enforce his
will. He told the Majlis opposition bluntly and quite truthfully, “You
dare not step outside the Majlis and criticize the National Front. You
would be torn to pieces by the crowds.”40
Professional Oppositionist
Saed Government The Government, the Court and Army controlled
elections to the 16th Majlis, and expected that their influence would be
paramount in Parliament. The National Front minority, elected from
Tehran and Kashan after public indignation led the Shah to order a re-
view of obviously rigged results in the first balloting, found strength in
the fact they were not sponsored by governing authority. They sought
and gained popularity by criticizing every move or proposal of the
Saed Government. Their wholly unconstructive parliamentary tactics
appealed to Iranian convictions that government, traditionally oppres-
sive, would never seek to further public good. Therefore, Mosadeq by
merely pointing out in public that the Government was against him
and that he opposed it won a reputation as a champion of the people’s
interests.
It cannot be said that the National Front brought down the Saed
Government, but its minority obstruction to parliamentary action on
Government proposals weakened both the nation and the Government
and gave the National Front its first advance in public esteem.
Mansur Government The Mansur Government, appointed by a va-
cillating Shah in an attempt to put off the rise of “strong man” Raz-
mara, was easy prey to Mosadeq. The Government’s corruption and
inefficiency was at once a target for parliamentary attacks and a protec-
tion for the National Front since no concerted counter-action could be
organized by the weak Government. Again the National Front’s popu-
larity grew as the prestige and authority of the Government waned.
Razmara Government The full history of the rise and fall of Razmara
could probably not be written. The intrigues of this Premier became so
intricate within a few months of his rise to power that it would be im-
possible to follow the many secret channels he maintained to British
39 “My program concerns the oil and my work is to carry out the nationalization
law”. Address to the Senate September 5, 1951. [Footnote is in the original.]
40 Statement in the Majlis, December 11, 1951. [Footnote is in the original.]
