1246 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement will grant the opportunity for friendly consultation aimed at reducing the adverse impact of the decree. When considering the possible Impact of Venezuela’s action on Middle Eastern arrangements, it is the Department’s firm view that the concession relationships in the Middle Eastern countries are contracts which may be modified only by mutual agreement of the interested parties. The United States attaches utmost importance in international relations to the maintenance of confidence that contractual obligations will be honored, and would be deeply concerned if contracts with its citizens should be breached. This is in contrast to the situation in Venezuela where the concessionaire was not legally assured of any limitation on the government’s power to tax, but relied on the moral assurance of the government’s stated intention to adhere to the 50–50 principle. 5. Recommended Action The foregoing is forwarded to provide U.S. representatives with an accurate picture of the Venezuelan situation as it stands today and to enable U.S. Missions to answer questions which may be put to them on the subject by host governments. It may also be used, at the discretion of the Missions, as the basis for discussions with senior representatives of American oil companies. In the Department’s judgment, it would be unwise for U.S. representatives to initiate conversations with the respective governments. However, if approached, U.S. representatives should indicate that the U.S. disapproves of the failure of Venezuela to consult with interested parties prior to the promulgation of the decree law, and is deeply concerned over the probable economic consequences to Venezuela. The total effect of this law on Venezuela’s revenue and investments remain to be seen. If appropriate in the circumstances, representatives should emphasize the difference between the Middle East arrangements and those in Venezuela, stressing the requirement, in the case of the former, for prior consultation in any effort to change contractual relations, since commitments in the Middle East are subject to international contracts which may only be modified by mutual agreement between the interested parties. In the event the government indicates intention to revise existing arrangements, the Department should be promptly notified. The Department would appreciate receiving information on press comments and other views being expressed in Middle Eastern countries on Venezuela’s tax decree. Dulles
