232 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement political facts of Chile as well as the economic ones. Likewise, we need to reassess how we can get the best public relations mileage out of what we do. Lack of understanding is the root of much of our trouble, but new systems and techniques are needed, rather than more volume. Some Suggestions Following are some broad ideas for U.S. Government action which may be helpful in considering the situation: 1) Take initiatives which will provide reasonable and fair solutions for copper and other commodity problems. If the presently projected subsidy plan for non-­ferrous metals is carried out, be certain it works in such a way that it will be helpful and not harmful to the economic life of Chile and other affected countries. 2) Provide a source of financing which will enable Chile to achieve economic development as fast as the remainder of its social and economic structure permits. Demonstrate faith in the economic future of Chile by taking long term developmental risks. If we are willing to loan money for balance of payments in order to keep Chile afloat, we should be willing to loan money to enable her to steam ahead. By doing so, we will contribute appreciably to the country’s capacity to pay back the relatively non-­productive loans for the former purpose. Let’s dust off the Chilean Agricultural and Development Plan and see if we can’t really help them get it started. 3) Take advantage of the Chilean and other Latin American ambition to achieve a regional market. Let us come out four-­square in favor of it—Chileans feel we are opposed to it for selfish reasons. Our support could make it a success. Besides contributing directly to the solution of a serious economic problem in this area, it could be a vehicle through which we could gradually help in the achievement of many other projects in the economic field. 4) Channel more of our economic development assistance into sectors where it will have a broad social as well as economic impact. In Chile almost all U.S. Government, international, and private financing has gone into activities in remote areas or to private companies, also frequently in remote areas, where the man in the street sees little direct benefit to him. A few newspaper stories is all he knows about it and he soon forgets that. This applies to the nitrate, copper, steel and coal industries, and the Government-­owned electric plants. Loans in areas where everybody could see the direct effects, such as those for the railroads and the highways, have been held up by the World Bank. 5) As one means of fulfilling the above recommendation, undertake a serious effort to help remedy the tragic housing situation. We loan money for buildings to house machines, but we have been unwilling to help house that other even more important productive factor—­men.
