Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
677
(7) Rusk told Dobrynin on August 23 that there would be no
movement on other issues until the situation in Czechoslovakia was
clarified.8
(8) The State Department actively discouraged US business ties
with the Soviet Union.
(9) We stopped, turned down or delayed requests for export li-
censes to the Soviet Union.
(10) We stopped participation in trade fairs in the Soviet Union.
(11) We cancelled pending cultural exchanges with the Soviets. (C)
As you will recall, the invasion of Czechoslovakia also resulted in
the cancellation of the scheduled first round of SALT talks between
Washington and Moscow. While I would oppose any freeze on our ef-
forts to achieve SALT ratification, I think it would be a mistake to con-
fine our response to this Soviet intervention in Afghanistan to words.
In this connection, I enclose a memorandum from Marshall Brement of
the NSC Staff which lists a menu of actions we could take to evidence
our displeasure with Moscow.9 I would welcome your guidance on
what you feel might be done. I do think something definite in our bilat-
eral relationship with Moscow should follow this extraordinary act of
Soviet arrogance and brutality and that Warren Christopher should in-
form the Allies on Monday what specific steps we intend to take. In my
judgment, such resolve on our part would have significant benefits for
us, both domestically and internationally. (S)
8 Rostow transmitted a summary of the Rusk–Dobrynin conversation via telegram
to Johnson at the LBJ Ranch in Texas on August 24; see Foreign Relations, 1964–1968,
volume XIV, Soviet Union, Document 290.
9 Not found attached.
133.
Editorial Note
From 1:04 to 1:50 p.m. on December 31, 1979, President Jimmy
Carter participated in a taped television interview with Frank
Reynolds, a correspondent with ABC News and co-anchor of ABC’s
“World News Tonight.” Portions of the interview were scheduled to air
that evening on the program with other segments scheduled to air on
ABC throughout the week. Reynolds conducted the interview from the
ABC News studios in New York; the President was in the Oval Office.
(Carter Library, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary)
