3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
212
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
informing us of a series of planned ICBM test launches the last few
days of this month and in November (see text attached).2
The following subjects were also discussed:
1. Middle East. The Secretary recalled that the letter from the co-
chairmen of the Geneva Conference went to the Security Council, and
recommended that this precedent be followed again, as well as in the
matter of having the working groups report to the plenary conference,
without having this specified in the working paper.
On the subject of Palestinian representation, the Secretary said he
had the impression that Arafat was showing signs of beginning to
move toward presenting names which could then be checked out with
the other participants; Dobrynin said, however, that this was not his
impression.
2. SALT. The Secretary reviewed his recent testimony and consul-
tations with the Congress, including the information that had been pro-
vided to the Senate Foreign Relations and Armed Services Committees
on a confidential basis. He said that every effort was being made to
avoid leaks, but that leaks might nevertheless occur. He indicated that
the Congress was raising very serious questions about the issues under
negotiation, and stressed the importance of having more specific assur-
ances on Backfire range and production rates. Dobrynin said that
Moscow was aware of our concern, since the matter had been raised
with Gromyko. The Secretary also stressed the interest expressed by
Senator McIntyre,3 among others, in an agreement limiting new missile
systems, reflecting the view, which he shared, that significant arms lim-
itations would be achieved when this kind of agreement was combined
with an agreement limiting numbers.
Dobrynin remarked that Semenov, the chief of the Soviet delega-
tion in Geneva, thinks things are moving fairly well.
3. Radiation. The Secretary informed Dobrynin that a book would
be published during the coming week on the subject of the Soviet radia-
tion of the US Embassy in Moscow. Dobrynin said he could not under-
stand why the US was raising the issue, since Deputy Undersecretary
Read4 had been able to cite only one instance in the preceding week in
which this radiation had been observed. Shulman pointed out that at
least a dozen bursts of radiation had been recorded in recent weeks,
and said that information underlining the seriousness of the matter
would be put before Dobrynin.
2 Not attached and not found.
3 Senator Thomas James McIntyre, (D-New Hampshire).
4 Ben Read, Deputy Under Secretary for Management.
