1976  7
Democratic platform committee.4 The problem stemmed from the plat-
form’s failure to note that the reduction would be one from a projected 
increase in the budget, that it would take time to attain such a reduc-
tion, and that the reduction would be in budget authority rather than 
outlays. There was a discussion of the manner in which this pledge 
should be treated, and of the realistic possibilities for reducing defense 
spending.
6. Arms transfers. Mr. Vance introduced this topic by noting his sup-
port for the Humphrey Amendment.5 Governor Carter noted that he 
too would have vetoed the Humphrey bill, insofar as he believes that 
it infringes on Presidential prerogatives.6 Mr. Vance noted the desir-
ability of investigating the possibility of multilateral efforts to restrain 
arms transfers. There was a discussion on the pros and cons of selling 
sophisticated weapons to third world countries, with Mr. Nitze gen-
erally being less hostile to such arms sales than other members of the 
group.
7. Conclusion. Governor Carter concluded the meeting by noting 
that he would like to have follow-­up sessions on specific regions and 
on specific types of forces with fewer people who specialized in the 
particular topic.
4 The 1976 Democratic Party platform stated: “Barring any major change in the 
international situation, with the proper management, with the proper kind of investment 
of defense dollars, and with the proper choice of military programs, we believe we can 
reduce present defense spending by about $5 billion to $7 billion.” (“Excerpts From Plat-
form to Be Submitted to the Democratic National Convention,” New York Times, June 18, 
1976, p. 12)
5 An amendment to the fiscal 1976 military assistance appropriation. [Footnote is 
in the original. Senator Humphrey’s amendment to the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, 
postponed indefinitely by the Senate on June 14, would have set restrictions on U.S. arms 
transfers to foreign countries.]
6 On November 2, Governor Carter defeated President Ford in the 1976 Presidential 
election. He took the Presidential oath of office on January 20, 1977.
