412
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
ation, would therefore seem entirely reasonable and prudent and,
given the treaty amendment procedure, the possibility for reconsid-
ering the PNE question would exist whether or not explicitly recog-
nized in the treaty. Moreover, the treaty amendment procedure would
give US an effective veto over any future proposal for exempting PNEs.
In reality, acceptance of our modified proposal would amount to ac-
ceptance of a PNE ban. Far from being a US concession, it would reaf-
firm and formalize our position and put US on the strongest ground, in
case we have to stand and fight on that ground for a sustained period.
However, the sooner we can set forth this position, and present it in a
formal and concrete way, the easier it should be for Soviet officials to
pursue a serious reconsideration of the issue. Although we would not
be making a concession from our standpoint, our new proposal could
still be portrayed to the Soviets as a good-faith effort to meet their
longer-range concerns.
(d) On the question of on-site inspections, it was concluded at the
SCC meeting in September3 that “mandatory” inspections have little
utility as a verification measure and, in any event, would create some
serious practical difficulties if applied on US territory. Therefore, ac-
cepting the concept of “challenge” inspection is something we would
wish to do on our own sooner or later. By playing that card now, we
would undercut the argument by the Soviet Delegation (to US and to
the Soviet leaders) that they have been reasonable on all other issues
and now the US must be reasonable on PNEs. It would also show the
Soviet leadership that, if they accept our PNE proposal, we are pre-
pared to show flexibility in areas where they have in the past staked out
strong positions of principle.
(e) By resuming detailed negotiations in mid-January, it would
give US time to develop some of the detailed aspects of our verification
position. At present, Delegation’s guidance on verification is mostly of
a general character and would have to be fleshed out considerably in
preparation for detailed negotiations.
7. We have discussed this approach with the British Delegation,
and they strongly support both the tactical and substantive aspects, as
well as the timing. British feel particularly strongly about recessing by
end of next week and plan to make formal proposal to that effect on Oct
28. They anticipate no significant change in the Soviet PNE position
and believe that prolonging the talks now would convey a signal of
weakness in our PNE stand and would play Morokhov’s game by his
rules.
3 The SCC meeting, held on September 27, is available in Carter Library, National
Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 89, SCC 032, CTB, Negotiating Issues and
Options.
