1264  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
AFOAT–1 for further evaluation and correlation with data from other 
elements of the Atomic Energy Detection System.
Equipment of the same type has been supplied to the British for 
their operations. In a similar way they identify significant signals 
and send the signal characteristics by message through headquarters, 
AFOAT–1, to the net headquarters at Ft. Monmouth for correlation 
with U.S. data.
The acoustic data are used to determine the time of burst to about 
± 5 to 10 minutes, the location of burst within a radius of about 100 
miles, and the yield to about ± a factor of 2 for small shots and to about 
± 15 to 20 per cent on large yield tests.
c. The Seismic Component. The seismic component is made up of 
eight surveillance stations under the operational control of AFOAT–1. 
These stations are located in Spain, Turkey, Korea, Alaska, Australia 
and three in the U.S. (See Figure 2.) In addition, one seismic station 
with similar equipment is operated by the U.K.
Each seismic station is composed of an array of four concrete piers 
poured on solid rock and deployed when possible at equal spacing 
along a two-­mile line. Each pier accommodates a vertical sesimome­
ter and one of the piers has, in addition, two horizontal instruments 
oriented at 90° with each other to permit recording of the three com­
ponents of earth’s motion on that pier. In those cases where a linear 
array is possible, the axis of the array is oriented to favor reception 
of a signal from the USSR and to discriminate against known sources 
of microseisms. The individual seismometers are connected through 
wire lines several miles in length to a central recording station. Seismic 
waves from a distant source are refracted upward from the mantle to 
the seismometers at an angle which is nearly vertical. In-­phase signals 
are thus produced on all four seismometers which result in a gain in 
amplitude proportional to the square root of the number of seismom­
eters. Since microseismic disturbances, in general, travel horizontally 
from local sources to the station, the response of the seismometers to 
noise is uncorrelated. Earth motion of about 1–2 millimicrons can be 
detected under favorable background conditions.
At the central recording station the signals from individual seis­
mometers are amplified and recorded on 35-­mm film, together with 
standard time signals from WWV or WWVH as appropriate. The 
response characteristics of the seismographs favor the reception of seis­
mic disturbances in the period range of 0.5 to 1.0 seconds where the 
maximum energy in the earth from atomic explosions is found. Back­
ground noise at other frequencies is excluded and as a result the signal-­
to-­noise level at the station is increased.
The film at each of the seismic stations is developed three times 
during each 24-­hour period and scanned by field personnel for evidence
