974
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
Vrhovec’s discussions with Ghotbzadeh through its Ambassador. The
Yugoslavs had told Iran that they could not support the holding of the
hostages. (C)
President Mijatovic said he would like to make a point about disar-
mament. It was important to do something to halt the futile situation
regarding disarmament, and he felt it would be worthwhile to take an
initiative at Madrid. He also felt that a well prepared conference on
disarmament in Europe would be useful. He praised President Carter’s
readiness to observe the SALT II treaty, which he claimed would be
an important contribution to arms control. (C)
He then turned to a discussion of international economic relations
and expressed Yugoslavia’s disappointment at the current state of
North-South negotiations. In Yugoslavia’s view, this was one of the
reasons for the current economic situation. If this continued, conflicts
were bound to increase. Yugoslavia advocated the greatest possible
flexibility on the part of the developed and the developing countries,
even though there was a lack of equality. The Yugoslavs believed that
a more flexible attitude on the part of the United States would be of
immense importance. They recognized that it would not be possible
to make a radical change, but some new initiative was needed to
demonstrate forward progress and that the process was not totally
dead. In Yugoslavia’s view, U.S. prestige would be enhanced in the
NAM and the world at large by such an initiative. Such an initiative
would also have a positive influence on Eastern Europe. The Soviet
Union, he stressed, had an unreasonable attitude toward relations
between the developing and the developed world. (C)
President Carter replied that North-South relations had been a mat-
ter of considerable discussion in Venice. The heads of state represented
there had directed their Ministers to develop better ways and means
to aid the developing countries. The United States itself had undertaken
a number of measures in this regard, including reducing trade barriers
to imports from the developing world. The Soviet Union, however,
had done very little, except helping Cuba. Similarly, the OPEC countries
had done very little except with other Arab countries. The President
stressed his strong commitment to improve relations between the
developed and the developing world. In addition to what the countries
represented in Venice were already doing, they would make an intense
analysis of the situation in the coming months. (C)
President Carter then suggested that the discussions could be contin-
ued at the State dinner that evening and at the breakfast the next
morning, joking that he did not want his first action in Yugoslavia to
make all of the Yugoslav leadership late for lunch. (U)
President Mijatovic agreed, saying that they could reserve bilateral
relations for breakfast. (U)
