March–August 1953 306. Memorandum From the Chief of Station in Iran [text not declassified] to the Chief of the Near East and Africa Division, Directorate of Plans, Central Intelligence Agency (Roosevelt)1 [number not declassified] Tehran, August 28, 1953. [less than 1 line not declassified] Contribution to TPAJAX 1. In Station opinion we cannot be too complimentary concerning the contributions of our [less than 1 line not declassified] agents to the success of TPAJAX. [less than 1 line not declassified] did remarkably good job while maintaining security at all times. They are to be highly commended for laying the groundwork for action and providing the spark which set off the demonstrations on 19 August. Their contribution can best be described by a general review of TPAJAX. 2. As the project developed in late July and early August, we were still faced with the overriding problem of fear—fear on the part of most Iranians, including those in the opposition, to take any action against the Mossadeq government. In retrospect, our only hope to get popular and active backing in a movement to unseat Mossadeq was to point up an issue which would instill greater fear in the average Iranian than his fear of Mossadeq. For the first three weeks in August, [4½ lines not declassified] were able to lay the groundwork for future action. They were assisted in this campaign [less than 1 line not declassified] who also emphasized the collaboration of Mossadeq and the Tudeh. Secretary Dulles’ and President Eisenhower’s comments concerning the Tudeh were of great help and gradually the people of Tehran began to feel a greater fear than the one which previously pervaded their lives. They began to feel that Mossadeq’s retention of power could only lead to a Communist state. They believed this strongly and it was reflected in the conversations of most to whom we talked during this period. There was still a deep fear of Mossadeq, but the groundwork had been laid— given an opportunity to act against Mossadeq with some degree of success, Iranians would join together to overthrow him. 3. On Sunday, August 16, news of [cryptonym not declassified] press interview began to leak out. The fact that he possessed a Firman began to spread, but still there was no proof since few had actually seen facsimiles of the Firman. [2½ lines not declassified] On Tuesday, reports of the Firman were printed in several papers and Foreign Minister Fatemi
