1164 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement Uruguayan imports, it can be hoped that Herrerista measures may help promote economic recovery. The Herrerista segment of the Nationalist Party, which has been under the leadership of Luis Alberto HERRERA for over a generation, was essentially friendly toward the United States and very pro-British up until the Terra revolution2 in Uruguay in 1933. At that time, the Herreristas supported this Uruguayan version of strong-­man government and showed similar enthusiasm for the dictatorships which existed in Italy and Germany. This led to an orientation toward Germany during World War II, and subsequently led to some enthusiasm for Peron’s type of demagogic dictatorship. Now that all of these dictatorships have been thoroughly discredited, there is no current indication of enthusiasm for totalitarian ideas in the Herrerista group. Up until about ten months ago, the Herrerista newspaper, El Debate, had frequent editorial criticisms and sneering innuendos concerning U.S. policy in a large variety of matters. However, during the last six months of that period, from 18 months ago to 10 months ago, when the Colorado List 153 newspaper Acción was notably critical of the United States and inclined to accuse the United States of much of the responsibility of Uruguay’s economic ills, particularly the loss of Uruguayan markets for wool, this Colorado criticism was matched by a trend in El Debate toward gradually increasing tolerance of United States policies. In other words, it appears that a large factor in the critical Herrerista attitude toward United States’ policies had been one of opposition to the attitude of the Colorado List 15 Government. So far as the general orientation of the Herreristas is concerned, a large proportion of their support is probably found among the smaller ranchers and farmers than any other single group; a majority of the largest ranchers and farmers could fairly be said to be supporters of the UBD, and a majority of the industrialists were probably also UBD supporters. Since UBD collaboration will, in essence, be essential to the Herreristas, the combination of Nationalist factors in the new Administration will, therefore, be conservative. On the other hand, it should be remembered that the concentration of property in Uruguay is decidedly limited as compared with most other countries and that extreme conservatism in this country is a minor element. The new Administration may, therefore, not be notably reactionary. 2 Reference is to Gabriel Terra, President of Uruguay, 1931–1938, who dissolved both the National Council of Administration and the legislature in 1933, and called for a constitutional convention. The new constitution concentrated executive power in the President. 3 Since the 1940s, the two major factions of the Colorado Party were List 14 and List 15, the former lead by the sons of José Battle, President of Uruguay, 1903–1907 and 1911–1915, and the latter by his nephew, Luís Battle Berres.
