stored-up recollections of abuses and indignities on the part of foreigners towards their people—instances of jostling off the sidewalks, of the kicking of rickshaw coolies, and the like. Even though it expresses itself in political terms, the present crisis of feeling, it seems to me, is to be construed as a revulsion against what the individual Chinese feels to be the offense to his personal dignity and self-esteem implicit in the overbearing attitude of the white man towards the Chinese. It is an inferiority complex which under the stress of an almost nation-wide excitement prompts him to a hysterical selfassertion that is subjective rather than objective, and that involves antiforeign feeling only indirectly and as an incident to the assertion of self. 5. This feeling has been further complicated by the fact that thinking Chinese are aware of the failure they are making in the organization of their national life and morbidly conscious of the poor showing that they have made in the eyes of foreign nations. It is especially true of Chinese human nature that it flinches from recognition of its own deficiencies and by an instinctive subconscious process seeks excuses in the action of others. It is natural and easy for the Chinese to gloss over the miserable political conditions which they realize and resent by reference to such catchwords as unequal treaties or foreign imperialism. 6. Under the impulse of this passionate determination no longer to be “looked down upon” there seems to be coming about a further change in the attitude of the Chinese towards their obligations. It is unfortunately true that for several years they have been growing more lax and indifferent towards such standards of honesty and responsibility as used to be traditional in this country. That was a negative attitude however; now there is apparent a tendency towards positive repudiation of obligations. Not only the professional radicals … but even certain sober and conservative elements appear to be drifting into a state of mind that takes it for granted that treaty obligations must be repudiated as incompatible with the sovereignty and dignity of the nation. Even Hsiung Hsi-ling, once Prime Minister under Yuan Shih-kai, has argued to me that China could not take part in the Special Conference or the Commission on Extraterritoriality as such participation would be an acknowledgement of the right of powers to dictate to China in the matters involved. In the course of our conversation he was altogether frank in acknowledging that China would not for instance be capable now or in the proximate future of fulfilling the judicial functions that would devolve upon her if we were to give up extraterritoriality. But despite this admission he insisted that this inequality in the treaties must be adjusted by China without regard to the pretensions of the powers. 7. A less radical view was presented to me by Sun Pao-chi, who was Minister for Foreign Affairs under Yuan and more recently Prime Minister. He came apparently at the instance of the Minister for Foreign Affairs to whom I had taken occasion to say that we stood upon the provisions of the Washington Conference as affording the means to make progress towards the realization of China’s aspirations in the matter of customs and extraterritoriality. Sun urged that the Washington Conference decisions
