January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981 1251 negotiations in Herzlia,3 have led to a number of conclusions about the situation we face and the manner in which we should proceed through May 26 and beyond. In essence we believe that the negotiations are beginning to cut into the tough issues and while clearly there is little hope of concluding an agreement by May 26, we have concluded the negotiations should be pursued as intensively as possible until an agreement is reached. We recognize this may take some time and that in the meantime we will face a problem in maintaining credibility on the part of the Arabs and Europeans in the efficacy of our approach. With respect to the latter, the Secretary in his trip to Europe4 has begun to set forth the rationale for our approach and to make it clear that we consider it essential that the Europeans take no action that would make these negotiations more difficult. In one forum or another we will also begin to put out a public line that affirms our determination to pursue these negotiations until an autonomy agreement is reached and expresses confidence in the Camp David process as the only practical way to proceed toward a peace settlement. 3. With respect to the Arabs, we recognize there is little that we can do to influence the radical Arabs in any event. But we do want to keep in close touch with the moderate Arabs, and in particular to convey a signal to the Saudis and Jordanians at an early stage as to how we intend to proceed. In using the points below we want to give you maximum flexibility to adapt your presentation to your various interlocutors; the important thing is to get our message across as effectively as possible to the key officials in your host governments over the days ahead. We want to avoid appearing to be defensive. We do not think the Arabs (or Europeans) are going to have an easy time putting together an alternative strategy and we believe it will help to keep momentum from building in this direction if we project confidence in our own game plan. 4. Begin talking points: —After a thorough review of the results of the recent Herzlia Round of negotiations and the overall status of the talks, we are convinced that, while agreement obviously cannot be reached by May 26, the negotiations should continue at as intense a pace as possible in the weeks ahead. —It would of course have been ideal if the date set as a goal by the two parties could have been met. However, these are unprecedented negotiations in terms of their complexity and their objective, and it is 3 See Document 368. 4 Muskie attended the NATO Defense Planning Committee meeting in Brussels May 13–15 and the ceremonies for the 25th anniversary of the Austrian State Treaty in Vienna May 15–16.
