Afghanistan did not have proper qualifications. He added that Afghanistan had asked for more personnel in certain cases, citing their request to Care- Medico (which had a large U.S. personnel component) for more medical specialists. He added with apparent regret that Care-Medico had been unable to comply, and that he had learned shortly before departing Kabul of Care-Medico’s decision to withdraw all of its personnel from the country. 9. Shah Wali replied in the negative when asked if he expected changes in basic DRA policies following recent leadership changes. He expected continuity since the policies were laid down by the party, and the party still existed. Newsom said we had noticed President Amin’s stated desire for good relations with Afghanistan’s neighbors Pakistan and Iran. Shah Wali said this reflected the sincere desires of the Afghan people and the party. He said Deputy FonMin Dost’s visit to Pakistan had resulted in “fruitful talks,” and that he had met with Agha Shahi in Havana and former President Taraki had also talked with Pakistani President Zia there. He was careful to point out that the latter meeting “reflected the desire of our government.” He indicated that both Agha Shahi and Zia had been invited to Kabul, but that it was understood Zia would come only after an Agha Shahi visit had taken place. 10. At another point in the conversation, Shah Wali took a mild swipe at Pakistan when discussing the underlying causes of the insurgency. He said the rebels were mostly those who had lost their former feudal privileges, but added that part of the problem was created by Afghanistan’s neighbors. He pointed to the camps in Pakistan where Afghan “fugitives” were trained. He added that Pakistan also sent some “militia” into Afghanistan. Asked about the refugee situation, Shah Wali argued that Afghanistan’s borders were very porous and that 2.5 million nomads crossed the frontiers every year. The explanation, he concluded, was that “they have detained our nomads.” 11. On the subject of relations with the Soviet Union, Shah Wali said Afghanistan’s traditional good relations with its northern neighbor had changed little with the change of governments over the years. Asked if he saw any contradiction between Afghanistan’s profession of non-alignment and the presence of Soviet troops in the country, Shah Wali said the numbers of Soviet advisers had been exaggerated. A mountain had been made out of mole-hill. He pointed out that Afghanistan had had Soviet advisers before the revolution, and said the number had not changed much. He declined to be pinned down as to exact numbers there now, and said there were advisers from other nations such as India. In apparent contradiction of his earlier statement, he concluded there had been no qualitative change in the situation, just a quantitative one.
