Hungary 499 —Successfully concluded the program document to the cultural and scientific exchange agreement5 and secured a satisfactory site for our first major independent cultural exhibit in Hungary. —Deepened our economic cooperation through an EXIM/National Bank Agreement, a Double Taxation Agreement,6 a successful first meeting of our Joint Economic and Commercial Committee, and implementation of a bilateral MTN agreement.7 —Continued to urge the GOH to resolve outstanding family reunification problem cases, which have been kept to a minimum. —Made progress toward a property settlement; and —Maintained a high level political dialogue through successful visits: Codels O’Neill, Brademan, and Vanik and Assistant Secretary Vest to Hungary and Deputy Prime Minister Huszar to the United States.8 Further substantial (although unspectacular) progress on such projects as the provision of Consular services to increasing numbers of Americans and Hungarians, markedly increased distribution of ICA materials, and the opening of offices in Budapest by Dow Chemical and an American bank underlined our growing practical interaction with Hungary and consequent decrease in Hungary’s dependence on the Soviet Union. 5. We still have problems: Some family reunification cases persist in spite of our general success in this area; a serious dispute over patent rights or the violation of them; slow development of our share of the Hungarian market following the extension of MFN; too slow progress in our property negotiations; discouragingly limited contact with Party officials; and above all at this time, unacceptable criticism in the Hungarian media of the U.S. and our policies reflecting a comprehensive identification with Soviet policies. 6. The Hungarian regime, for its own reasons, continued to follow policies which will redound to our long-term benefit; an international 5 The “Agreement between the Government of the United States of American and the Government of the Hungarian People’s Republic on Cooperation in Culture, Education, Science and Technology” went in effect May 21, 1979. (30 UST 1502) 6 The United States and Hungary signed an exchange of notes on the “Avoidance of Double Taxation and the Prevention of Fiscal Evasion with Respect to Taxes on Income” in Washington on February 12. The Senate approved the agreement on July 9 and President Carter signed the instrument of ratification on August 7. (Carter Library, White House Central Files, Countries, Box CO–30, CO 67, 1/20/77–1/20/81) The agreement entered into force September 18, 1979. (30 UST 6357) 7 Telegram 6432 from Budapest, December 28, 1979, reported that the United States- Hungarian Tariff Agreement went into effect January 1, 1980. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790596–0235) 8 See Document 166 for a memorandum of conversation between Huszar and Brzezinski.
