1956 819 potential, would be futile and can only have purpose if intent is to block rather than reach agreement on our declaration. H. I have outlined my views point by point and in concrete fash­ ion, concerning areas in which I consider agreement is essential to reach an understanding in our declaration. If you are in agreement with me on these points, let us proceed with issuance of declaration. If we are in agreement in these essential areas, may we not leave our disagreements in other areas to be ironed out in later stage of seeking practical and feasible means for settlement of our disputes? 2. Wang said, reading from notes, I recall it is 20th meeting today since we started our discussion on issuance of a declaration. We had hoped it would be possible for us to reach an agreement on this question. 3. Wang said, such an agreement as I have previously pointed out, must not be taken as capable of resolving all questions between us. Such an agreement would only indicate a common desire of US to settle issues between us. Such a desire should be one that is acceptable to either of us. How can we be expected reach an agreement if one side tries to impose its views on other? 4. Wang said, at last meeting he said to me that he hoped I would be able to put forth further concrete opinions at this meeting. However after listening carefully to statements made at this meeting he found we still remain in same place as we found selves previously. We have now spent so much time discussing declaration renouncing use of force that respective positions and views of our two sides have now become quite clear. He didn’t see any point in letting conferences proceed in this man­ ner. It seemed to him that we turning in circles and always finding our­ selves in same place in discussion of such a declaration. Such manner of discussion is not what they originally expected it to be. Wang said I said this morning we should not turn round in circles in discussion. He is willing to explore ground with me in all frankness to see if there is any hope reach agreement in this respect. 5. Wang turned to prepared statement and said he would like to point out once again that clause on self-­defense right advanced by my side in draft declaration was absolutely unacceptable to their side. For, as his side repeatedly explained, it was intent my side by self-­ defense clause to get them into recognizing in effect status quo US sei­ zure ­Taiwan and US interference in China’s internal affairs in offshore islands. Statements I had made at last few meetings indicated that my side itself has been aware that self-­defense clause can be removed from declaration. Therefore, no point arguing. Should my side insist on self-­defense clause his side can only come to conclusion that my side not desiring reach agreement. 6. Wang said, as regards my other amendment to his Dec 1 draft, “they will not resort to force in Taiwan area or elsewhere”, his side has
