1586 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement submit comments on a proposal by the Secretary of State concerning the formation of an inter-­governmental ad hoc group to prepare a study of the problems of surprise attack and related disarmament proposals. 2. The recent Geneva Conference of Experts on Surprise Attack was suspended with recognition that revised terms of reference were needed before the Conference could reconvene. The State Department proposes that the U.S. approach on the surprise attack problem should be broadened to include arms control measures. The Joint Chiefs of Staff believe that U.S. preparations for a new series of meetings require dif­ ferent terms of reference than those proposed by the Secretary of State. 3. The national security implications of the various arms control measures, that could be considered in a new and less restricted confer­ ence on surprise attack, appear to demand, as a first step, a broad U.S. review of disarmament matters from a wider viewpoint than that of surprise attack alone. Such a review would provide a basis for evaluat­ ing the surprise attack threat in terms of other threats to U.S. security, and for determining what effect the attainment of safeguards against surprise attack would have upon the over-­all U.S. defense posture. 4. The Joint Chiefs of Staff believe that: a. In view of the actions separating the Arctic Zone proposal, outer space considerations, suspension of nuclear weapons tests, and techni­ cal discussions on surprise attack from the August 29, 1957 Four Power disarmament package, there is an urgent need to review existing U.S. disarmament policy for consistency with these actions and national security requirements. The Disarmament Policy Review Working Group, which initiated such a review on 7 April 1958, should complete its action and propose necessary revisions. Within the framework of the revised policy, U.S. positions relative to disarmament measures including safeguards against surprise attack, could be developed by the proposed ad hoc study group. If, however, political considerations preclude completion of an over-­all review of our present disarmament policy, by the Disarmament Policy Review Working Group, within the apparent time limitations, it may be necessary to develop U.S. positions relative to disarmament measures within the framework of existing disarmament policy. b. The objective of the study proposed by the Secretary of State should be limited to the development of recommended U.S. positions on disarmament measures within current U.S. disarmament policy. The surprise attack problem should be considered within this context. The reverse approach would be unwise since the surprise attack problem is but one element of U.S. disarmament policy. Such an approach might lead to conclusions which are unacceptable within the framework of over-­all basic national security policy. c. Current U.S. disarmament policy does not include limitations on combat readiness of U.S. forces and limitations on deployment or operations. The Study Group proposed by the Secretary of State should restrict its considerations of measures which might place lim­ itations on the combat readiness of U.S. forces to the development of
