1956 779 deal as I just do not see what we say or do when, or perhaps, if we reach that stage. I was a little puzzled by your remark concerning the effect of any renunciation of force on the offshore islands. I have always assumed that when we said “Taiwan area” we were including the offshore islands and I believe that Wang thinks we do. It never occurred to me that we thought otherwise, and I do not believe I have ever given Wang any grounds for any other interpretation. As you can see from yesterday’s meeting I fear the “can of worms” of Chinese prisoners in the U.S. is finally opening up. I sure hope you have some good answers to suggest to me for the next meeting. As a few minor matters. They are obviously keeping Wang very well informed here, and he has often been ahead of me in such matters as the details of the correspondence from the hospital concerning Liu Yung-­ming, your conversations back there with the Indians etc. I cer­ tainly do not want to load the wires with any more telegraph traffic, but I believe on some of these matters it would be better to give me fairly complete summaries by telegram rather than rely on the pouch which is again very slow. On Liu Yung-­Ming for example I had to build much of my argument around inference and deduction, and at the pre­ ceding meeting he knew all about Robertson’s exchange with Mehta when I had no information at the time of the meeting. Nothing serious in the way of harm has happened thus far, but I would be in a much bet­ ter position in such exchanges if I was sure I knew everything there was to be known on the subject, and there is always the chance I may some day stub my toe very badly, if I do not have fully current information. I have been thinking about the question of Stanley’s detail and have discussed it with him also. First, he is entirely willing to do any­ thing the Department desires, although he is naturally loath to stay here for a prolonged period separated from his family. Next, I would, of course, be loath to lose him, but if I can be assured of keeping Dave would be willing to make a change. Next, the Consulate here is very hard pressed and I doubt very much they could spare a man for the approximately two full days a week that he would be occupied with the meetings. Stanley’s knowledge of Chinese is also a very valuable asset and as an FSO he should get started in his career. All this brings me to a thought I throw out for you to work on. Why not assign him here to the Consulate over-­complement? This would mean that he could start learning the consular ropes three days a week while working for me two days a week. He could bring over his family. Whatever happens to my talks there is likely to be some continuing contact here and it would be very useful to have some one stationed here with his background and knowledge of Chinese. It seems to me that it has much to recom­ mend it. He could take his FSI training whenever the situation here permitted. I have not talked to Gowen about this.
