560 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI sist that language be used which recognizes the possibility of extending the comprehensive treaty, under certain conditions. Under the formulation that the Soviets proposed in July, 1978,6 the review conference would be convened to “review the operation of the Treaty and to consider the question of extending it, depending on whether any states not Party to the Treaty will conduct nuclear explosions”. Aside from the question of “extension”, the Soviet formulation is deficient in that it heavy-handedly points a finger at France and China, which we are unwilling to do on broad policy grounds, and it highlights one possible reason for discontinuing the treaty to the exclusion of reasons that might be more relevant, to U.S. security interests. The Soviets have said that, just as the question of seismic stations is the most important remaining issue for the United States, the most important issue for them is finding a mutually acceptable formula for this clause (informal trilateral meeting, November 28). Soviet Delegation chairman Petrosyants stressed in the final plenary meeting in December that this issue is “also of great importance in terms of finding mutually acceptable solutions to verification issues, and in particular to the issue of national seismic stations”. Proposing a solution to the “replacement treaty problem” and the construction of a new review conference formulation at the beginning of the next round could, therefore, put us in a stronger position to insist that the Soviet Delegation respond to our proposals on the technical characteristics of national seismic stations. In addition, the British have frequently criticized the “replacement treaty” formulation (they agreed only reluctantly to table it last June), and have urged the US to put forth a new formulation. The British Delegation that visited the US on September 14 requested that the US alter its proposal, and suggested a formulation referring to treaty arrangements following the period of three years. We said then that we would keep the British suggestion under review. In December, the British restated their belief that it would be necessary to propose a new formulation on this issue in order to induce the Soviets to be more forthcoming on verification. They said that a number of possible formulations could meet our needs, including one that authorized the review conference “. . . to consider the question of any future treaty arrangements”. Objectives Our objectives are as follows: —to promote US national security by protecting all options for the period beyond three years. The President has decided to state his intention to re- 6 The Soviet proposal is in telegram 11490 from Geneva, July 26, 1978. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780306–0771)
