Chemical and Biological Weapons
187
guidance supplements that provided earlier (Ref A). Detailed re-
sponses to questions posed Ref A are being provided separately.
2. Del should seek to isolate those issues which resist resolution at
Delegation level and thus may need to be addressed by senior officials
on both sides. To permit such a judgment to be made, the Delegation
should seek to focus bilateral efforts on resolving issues in the areas
listed below, giving particular attention to verification. Specific issues
and detailed U.S. views are presented in the approved guidance
papers.
A. Irritants and riot control chemicals;
B. Provisions for super-toxic chemicals;
C. Type and quantity of chemicals and delivery devices which can
be retained;
D. Challenge inspection-related questions:
(1) Rights and functions of personnel carrying out challenge on-
site inspection,
(2) Obligation to provide a full explanation if a request for chal-
lenge inspection is refused,
E. Declaration of stocks and facilities,
(1) General declaration of stocks prior to entry-into-force of the
convention,
(2) Declaration of facilities,
F. Required international on-site verification;
G. Extent of use of toxic chemicals in field training exercises.
3. In context of discussion of negotiation and implementation of
any multilateral chemical weapons convention, the Delegation should
assure Soviets that U.S. considers it important for the U.S. and USSR to
work in close cooperation on a bilateral basis both before and after the
convention comes into force. The Delegation should indicate that U.S.
will present some ideas at a later stage—but would also welcome So-
viets suggestions on the best mechanism for such bilateral cooperation
and consultation.
4. Delegation should continue to brief allied reps in Geneva during
course of negotiations. In addition, consultations with the UK, FRG and
France should be offered in London, Bonn and/or Paris as appropriate.
5. We believe that period between round seven and round eight
should be long enough for thorough review in capitals of status of ne-
gotiations. Due to participation of some US Del members in SSOD, it
would not be practical to resume during SSOD. Del may tentatively
agree on late July date for beginning round eight. Date should be sub-
ject to confirmation through diplomatic channels in mid-June.
