196 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI PPM The following text addresses the contribution to monitoring that permanent on-­site presence (either portal perimeter monitoring or portal monitoring) provides: The U.S. START position would allow portal perimeter monitoring at facilities that produce START-­accountable solid rocket motors as large as or larger than the SS–25 first stage rocket motor. PPM at these facilities (we currently estimate that four Soviet facilities fit this category) should allow us to count precisely the number of SS–24 and SS–25 first-­stage motors that are shipped from these facilities after the treaty enters into force. Because START does not provide for inspection of the interior of declared production facilities, we would be unable to determine the number stored there. (S/NF) [4½ lines not declassified] If all Soviet facilities associated with solid rocket motors (we estimate that number to be about a dozen) were subject to inspection with no right of refusal, it would be significantly more difficult for the Soviets to produce motors covertly, although it would not prevent them from doing so. Under such a regime, the Soviets would be forced to produce motors at a facility not associated with solid rocket motor production, which would entail greater difficulties and risks than production at declared, overt facilities. (S/NF) In order to significantly inhibit the Soviets’ ability to produce motors and missiles, however, missile final assembly facilities—­which may load propellant segments into motor cases—­could be included in any PPM regime. Any Soviet cheating scheme to evade portal monitoring at a final assembly plant would have to be much more elaborate than a scheme to avoid PPM at a motor production plant. In the former case, the Soviets would have to direct all stages, PBVs, canisters, and many other components to an illegal final assembly facility. Such actions would affect numerous other Soviet facilities and would increase significantly the risk of detection. (S/NF) Ideally, if tamper proof tags were affixed to all treaty-­limited motors as they left the PPMd facility, and the tags could be checked on those motors prior to testing, motors produced at covert facilities could not be tested. However, effective tagging has not been proven to be a feasible concept, although several studies are underway. There are also several potentially effective evasion scenarios to such a regime. Finally, it is difficult to assess whether the scenario described above, which focuses only on first stage motors (the only accountable motor under the current U.S. proposal), would significantly reduce Soviet confidence in performance and reliability. Some even question whether confidence in upper-­stage motors would be degraded significantly if they were included in the tagging scheme. (S/NF)
