148  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
1. Affirm the current position. This would entail making explicit a 
right to deploy defenses after the non-­withdrawal period by main-
taining Article III, paragraph 2. of the U.S. draft treaty text, detailed 
above. (S)
Those who support this option believe the provisions are consistent 
with what President Reagan and General Secretary Gorbachev agreed 
to. They argue the provisions are necessary to guarantee the quid pro 
quo of the Defense & Space Treaty; trading agreement not to withdraw 
from the ABM Treaty in order to deploy defenses for a specified period 
of time, in return for freedom to deploy strategic defenses afterwards, 
without further reference to the ABM Treaty. They also argue that clari-
fying WSJS language will avoid interpretation debates after ratification. 
Finally, they argue that this provision is necessary to facilitate deploy-
ment of strategic defenses because withdrawing from the ABM Treaty 
could be a difficult political barrier. (S)
This option is supported by State, OSD, ACDA, Amb. Rowny and 
the Defense & Space Negotiator.
2. Reevaluate U.S. Defense & Space Objectives. This option would 
entail not resuming the Defense & Space talks until the fundamental 
U.S. objectives in D & S have been reaffirmed at the Cabinet level.
Those who support this option believe that one of the basic intents 
of the National Security Review, to identify the objectives of DST, has 
not yet been accomplished. They argue that the President’s objectives 
for DST should be clearly stated before proceeding further with dis-
cussion of negotiating positions. They also believe that to simply reaf-
firm previously held positions—­that were based on a different set of 
national security parameters—­could prove to be a serious mistake and 
result in a lost opportunity for the USG. Those who hold this view 
believe that Article III would have the effect of specifying a date cer-
tain when the U.S. would withdraw from the ABM Treaty and that this 
could provide the Soviet Union with an opportunity/right to deploy a 
territorial defense that the United States may be unable or unwilling to 
exercise. (S)
3. Non-­withdrawal X years, non-­deployment Y years. This option 
would entail seeking agreement to a non-­withdrawal period of x years; 
followed by a non-­deployment period of [2] [y] years, during which 
the sides would have intensive discussions on a cooperative transition 
and have unlimited testing rights; after which, unless the Parties agree 
otherwise, each would be free to deploy strategic defenses without fur-
ther reference to the ABM Treaty. (This option could be implemented in 
conjunction with options for differentiated periods of permitted testing 
activities discussed in DST 001.) (S)
Those who would support this option believe it would help over-
come the political barrier of withdrawing from the ABM Treaty in
