March 27–December 31, 1979
857
the risks of a serious conflict and promote Lebanese stability. Please let
me have your comments by June 12, 1979. (S)
Zbigniew Brzezinski
259.
Letter From Egyptian President Sadat to President Carter1
Cairo, undated
Dear President Carter,
During the recent celebration of the restoration of Egyptian au-
thority to the capital of Sinai, El-Arish, the Egyptian people’s feeling of
pride and joy was equalled only by their gratitude and praise for the
unforgettable role you played in bringing about this happy event.
Without your thoughtful contribution, the conclusion of the Peace
Treaty would have been impossible. I have no doubt that this role will
continue until all remaining aspects of the conflict are tackled with the
same sense of determination and commitment. It is with this in mind
that we have been accelerating the pace of normalization of relations
with Israel.
It is in this spirit also that we are approaching the second phase of
negotiations. We are doing so with hope and optimism despite our re-
alization that we are still faced with many extremely difficult problems.
I firmly believe that we can achieve our common goal if we preserve the
coordination and consultation we have maintained since we started the
peace process. I am sure that Secretary Vance has conveyed to you
what took place in the past few days.2 I have also asked Vice President
Mubarak to put you fully in the picture3 with respect to recent develop-
ments as well as our conception of how to move next in order to make
meaningful progress promptly. As you know, I strongly feel that there
is an urgent need to produce tangible progress soon with respect to Je-
rusalem. I hope that Prime Minister Begin can demonstrate more flexi-
bility in this area as he realizes the favorable results this is certain to ef-
fect. The problem of settlements is another sensitive area to which all
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, President’s
Correspondence with Foreign Leaders File, Box 5, Egypt: President Anwar al-Sadat,
1–12/79. No classification marking. At the top of the letter, Carter wrote: “Zbig, cc Cy J.”
The Department cabled the text of the letter in telegram 163814 to Cairo, June 25. (Carter
Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Cables File, State Department
Out, Box 116, 6/15–25/79)
2 See Document 256.
3 See Document 260.
