Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX been increasingly obvious that the divisions, instead of becoming resolved, are becoming deeper. My hope is that, within the bounds of your own principles and beliefs of what is best for Israel, that you look with favor on the present draft6 of the treaty and the other documents attached. They are not exactly as you would prefer, or President Sadat would prefer, but I hope that you, along with President Sadat will be as flexible as possible. I talked with President Sadat this afternoon7 just before calling you. Prime Minister Begin: I will, of course, read with great attention your letter, but as I don’t know yet any news about the decisions that took place during the night. I can only say, Mr. President, that you didn’t tell me that the draft presented to me is, in my opinion, a deviation from the Camp David conference. I have told my friends that we hold true and faithful to the Camp David framework. We shall not deviate from it whatsoever. The demands brought by Mr. Ghali from Egypt are a deviation from the Camp David agreements. It is absolutely clear. I had heard that if the Government of Israel does not agree to set up a timetable corresponding to the time of withdrawal to the Ras Muhammad and al-Arish line, then the Egyptians will not fulfill their commitment to exchange resident ambassadors. Ezer Weizman might have said something to General Ali, which was his right, but he does not decide the issues, as none of your representatives do, Mr. President. The Government of Israel decides. If the decision of the Government of Israel goes against any hints given by Ezer Weizman, then that decision stands. The Egyptians cannot say you broke your promise. We didn’t break any promises. The decisions are, in a Parliamentary regime, with the Government of Israel, not even with the Prime Minister. I am also one of the Cabinet. At Camp David, the Israeli delegation had full powers of the Cabinet to decide. This is not the case. If the Egyptians threaten us with not sending ambassadors, then we shall ask them to agree that ambassadors will be sent before we start any withdrawal, after the documents of ratification come into force and the peace treaty itself comes into force, as actually it should be. The peace treaty is signed, confirmed, and ratified, then we should have normal relations as written at Camp David. We agreed to postpone it actually for ten months. This was a very great concession. Now we are threatened that there won’t be any ambassadors whatsoever if we don’t comply with their demands. So that is not the way to negotiate in good faith. We do negotiate in good faith. The draft letters about the changes that will take place with Egypt only, because Jordan does not join them, without the administrative 6 See Document 131. 7 See Document 132.
