1434  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
to do so. It is entirely impossible for me to reconcile this undisputed fact 
with progress for improvement in relations and improvement in these 
talks. I had most earnestly in every way I could think of attempted to 
make this clear to you.
10. I continued. With respect to correspondents it is a similar sit­
uation, that is, is his interest in words or is his interest in substance? 
I failed to see the ground for his complaint. As far as I knew no news­
paper correspondents from his country had ever applied for entry into 
the U.S. In fact until a few weeks ago he never indicated any interest 
in the subject. As I told him at the last meeting, if it is the desire of 
any newspaperman to enter the U.S. his application will be accepted 
at any foreign service post throughout the world. His application will 
be considered on an individual case basis in accordance with our laws 
and regulations. If his authorities desired to approve or deny the appli­
cations for visas which have been made to him by U.S. correspondents 
whose passports have been validated for travel to his country, that is 
entirely a matter of their choice. If they wanted to deny all of them on a 
blanket basis or deny or approve them on an individual basis, that was 
entirely a matter of their choice. As far as the U.S. was concerned, under 
our laws, applications must be considered individually. I could see the 
basis for his complaint about this position or why it should prevent 
exchanges of newsmen.
11. I continued. As far as the question of renunciation of force was 
concerned, the situation still is that his authorities refuse to agree to an 
unconditional renunciation of force such as I had proposed. Their posi­
tion still appears to be that they are asking the U.S. to surrender to their 
point of view with respect to the Taiwan area even while they contin­
ued to use the threat of force. I could not see in that position the slight­
est element of any willingness to settle disputes by peaceful negotiation 
or the slightest element of equality, mutual benefit, or reciprocity.
12. Wang replied. I had spoken a lot of words concerning mutual 
benefit, equality and reciprocity. All these words sounded quite all 
right to him whereas in substance the record of our talks shows that in 
the course of these talks I had always been telling the Chinese govern­
ment to do this and to do that whereas the U.S. Government has never 
indicated its willingness to make any effort. Insofar as the agreement 
on civilians is concerned, the record shows that the U.S. side has always 
been telling the Chinese Government to take actions whereas the U.S. 
itself has not been taking actions to implement that agreement. Insofar 
as the release of prisoners is concerned according to my way of stating 
the matter it would seem that only the question of American prisoners 
is concerned while there is no question of Chinese prisoners. Such alle­
gations do not conform with the actual situation.
13. Wang continued. With respect to the visit of newspaper corre­
spondents, the official statement of my government indicated that it was
