96  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
Secretary Brown: The Middle East is probably the most demanding 
scenario, so if we have enough for that, we will have enough for any-
where else.
Mr. Aaron: There are two places we need to project our power: 
Korea and the Persian Gulf. The basic force sizing question has to do 
with splitting the difference.
Secretary Brown: But in Korea we plan to be ambiguous about 
deployment of ground forces.
Mr. Aaron: What is the Pacific fleet for? Ought we move it into the 
Indian Ocean?
Mr. Jayne: Let’s look at East Asia. Why don’t we get the Japanese to 
do more in terms of their air and naval capabilities?
Dr. Brzezinski: Japanese politics won’t permit. Either we will get 
incremental improvements or, if there is a great political shock (such 
as the loss of Korea), we might get a big jump. But that shock might 
separate us from the Japanese.
Admiral Turner: We need crisis management forces to maintain free 
use of the seas and in the event of terrorism.
Secretary Brown: Divisions don’t help you there. You need a rapid 
reaction capability.
Mr. Aaron: The problem is to maintain secrecy.
Secretary Brown: The military can maintain secrecy.
General Brown: The problem with maintaining secrecy occurs 
during the planning stages here in D.C. We can move a battalion out of 
Fort Bragg without a problem.
Dr. Brzezinski: We are talking about two kinds of force: (1) a small, 
long-­range, rapidly deployable strike force; and (2) a larger force for 
intervention.
Mr. Jayne: Why does the overall Navy structure appear insensitive 
to the strategy?
Secretary Brown: The Navy is not immediately identifiable with any 
of these strategies. It’s sort of an infrastructure. Also, we didn’t include 
a war-­at-­sea scenario.
Dr. Brzezinski: What would it take to reconfigure the Second Divi-
sion into a mobile versatile strike force for Korea, the Mideast and 
Europe?
Secretary Brown: A big expense is lift. Also, forces configured for 
one place may not be suitable for another. But it’s worth looking at.
Mr. Christopher: We have not paid enough attention to Africa. It’s a 
potential hot spot. What sorts of military forces do we need to protect 
the territorial integrity of states in Africa? Look how well the French 
did in Zaire.
