Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
407
85.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, June 2, 1978
SUBJECT
Speech on U.S.-Soviet Relations
I believe the speech should outline certain fundamental proposi-
tions regarding the relationship—and not focus much on current policy
issues, be they SALT, human rights, or Africa. The public—and the
world—need to be reminded that what is involved is “a long haul”
policy—not a series of either quick fixes or dramatic shifts.2 Your state-
ment on the “fundamentals” would thus provide the framework for
your specific policies, and reassure all concerned that the United States
has a clear sense of direction.
Anything you say will be scanned most carefully for “soft” or
“hard” signals, and this makes it all the more important that the tone be
consistent with your own sense of measured determination.3 The press
will be only too eager to find evidence of a new turn.
As I see it, the central difficulty we confront—one truly vital to our
national future—is the Soviet inclination to exploit global turbulence
for shortsighted gains, while engaging in a massive military buildup
which increasingly gives it additional political leverage. This challenge
must be confronted in a responsible way, which is neither alarmist nor
escapist.4
Accordingly, I attach two items:
1. Some suggested language;5
1 Source: Carter Library, Office of the Staff Secretary, Handwriting File, Presidential
File, Box 89, Annapolis Speech: 6/7/78 [2]. Secret. The President did not initial the memo-
randum. According to Brzezinski, the President decided to deliver a formal speech on
U.S.-Soviet relations: “After telling us that he expected all of us to hew to one line, and
that Vance should be the principal public spokesman on foreign policy, he then pro-
ceeded to develop the draft of the speech entirely on his own.” (Power and Principle, p.
320) The President did, however, request that Brzezinski, Brown, Turner, and Vance pro-
vide him with speech outlines. Brown’s and Turner’s outlines, sent under June 2 cover
memoranda, are in the Carter Library, Hertzberg Donated Historical Material, Speech
Files, Box 5, Annapolis, June 7, 1978. For Vance’s points, outlined in a June 2 letter to
Carter, see Document 86. Hertzberg and Doolittle’s suggested outline, sent to the Presi-
dent under a June 2 memorandum, is in the Carter Library, Hertzberg Donated Historical
Material, Speech Files, Box 5, Annapolis, June 7, 1978.
2 The President underlined “‘a long haul’ policy.”
3 The President underlined “measured determination.”
4 The President underlined most of this paragraph.
5 The 5-page outline is not printed. The President underlined most of the outline.
