March 27–December 31, 1979 875 —We are fully aware of the threat posed to the Israeli people by terrorist attacks planned and launched from locations in Lebanon. We know as well the problems which the Syrian presence and role in Lebanon raise for Israel. At the present time, however, the internal political situation in Syria is tense and uncertain in the wake of the recent massacre of Alawite cadets.5 Any outside action that appears challenging or humilitating to Syria is likely to lead to countermeasures. For this reason we now face the possibility that incidents such as today’s air clash may seriously impair the negotiating effort. It could as well destabilize the situation in Syria and lead to wider hostilities which, whatever the outcome, could be detrimental to both our nations’ interests. —The Israeli Government’s policy concerning retaliatory and preemptive attacks has long been a source of concern to the United States in terms of our interest in a stable Lebanon and a wider peace and we have discussed this with Israel on a number of occasions. Most recently, on June 13 we raised with Minister Weizman6 the pattern of Israeli military actions in and over Lebanon over the past two months. We were assured that it was not Israel’s desire or intention to engage Syrian aircraft in hostilities. Because of the likelihood of Syrian reaction, we asked that Israel change its practice of significantly increasing the number of overflights of Lebanon. We also approached Syria at that time.7 —Against this background we are again urging Syria to exercise maximum prudence and restraint. We must ask Israel to do likewise. Specifically, we urge strongly that Israel refrain from further bombing attacks in Lebanon. Such actions cannot but be seen as carrying the conflict to a higher and more dangerous level. It is only fair to alert Israel to the fact that actions such as these by Israel will make more intense questions already raised in the Congress about whether the American equipment used by Israeli forces in these actions is being properly and legally employed. Christopher 5 On June 16, a group of soldiers led by a Sunni army officer fired upon Syrian Alawite military cadets at an artillery school near Aleppo. The Embassy reported that the incident, resulting in an estimated death-toll of up to 27 cadets, represented a “quantum jump in security incidents that have occurred over past two and a half months. For the first time, to the best of our knowledge, there has been serious communal violence within the army which has obvious ramifications to stability of regime.” (Telegram 4075 from Damascus, June 19; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790277–0410) 6 The Embassy reported on the June 13 meeting between Lewis and Weizman in telegram 12714 from Tel Aviv, June 13; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790268–0009. 7 The Department ordered the approach of informing the Syrians that the U.S. Government had raised the issue of overflights with the Israelis in telegram 153428 to Damascus, June 15; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790269–0893.
