Covert and Overt Operations represented Capucci in his trial for gun-running in Jerusalem and could be helpful.5 Secretary Miller recommended an attempt to contact religious authorities in Mashhad and other areas who were influential but had been eclipsed by Khomeini. (S) Admiral Turner commented that the odds of accomplishing anything for the hostages in this manner were extremely slim. He wondered if we did not appear weak by starting negotiations again immediately after the failure of the rescue attempt. The Iranians will probably ask us to make more concessions. Secretary Brown said we want to establish contacts with a broad range of Iranian authorities in any event, since that will be important in the longer term. Mr. Aaron observed that we need an effective program which focuses public attention not only on the hostage issue but the larger dangers of a possible Soviet takeover. (S) Dr. Brzezinski said he was concerned that we were not focusing beyond the immediate crisis. He saw the danger of Iran merging with Afghanistan. We could find ourselves in the situation where the hostages are rescued by Soviet tanks. The key question is whether we wish to keep the pressure up or deescalate. Can we maintain a high level of pressure while continuing on the diplomatic track? (S) Mr. Saunders noted that Bani-Sadr has called a large meeting of Islamic and Nonaligned nations in Tehran to “view the evidence of U.S. aggression.” Without prejudice to the outcome of policy discussions this weekend, we will need to get messages out to key parties if we wish to have any influence on the event or possibly turn it to some useful purpose. He proposed selecting half a dozen key Islamic and Nonaligned leaders and sharing our thoughts with them in advance of the meeting. Mr. Aaron suggested using the themes developed in the strategy paper, for them to present in Tehran. All agreed. (C) Approve6 Avoid contact or association with this event 4. Legal Action Concerning the Shah. The judge in the New York court suggested in a bench conference that the issue should be resolved by Iran’s release of the hostages and some payment by the Shah. Mr. O’Dwyer (representing Iran) is now seeking permission to go to Tehran, while Mr. Jackson intends to meet with the Shah. All agreed that, if the Shah is unwilling to make an offer, it would be pointless—and possibly counterproductive—to raise the issue with the Iranians who are likely to demand payment of billions of dollars by the Shah. (C) 5. Islamic Conference. Mr. Cutler had been informed by the Saudi Ambassador that the forthcoming Islamic Conference will be held in 5 Bourguet. 6 Carter approved this option with a checkmark and initialed in the right margin.
