580
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
211.
Memorandum From Acting Secretary of State Smith to
President Eisenhower1
Washington, May 23, 1953.
Ambassador Henderson has personally written several despatches
giving his own analysis of trends in Iran and of recent conversations
with the Iranian Foreign Minister and other officials. I have made the
following extract of the most important paragraphs of these des-
patches. I believe they are a very accurate expression of the situation
and national state of mind in Iran, so accurate in fact that I suggest you
read them.
“On the one hand the Iranian press as well as most Iranians ca-
pable of expression condemn in principle foreign interference in Iran.
On the other hand relatively few politically conscious Iranians really
believe that it is possible for a power like the United States to refrain
from interference in Iran. Most Iranian politicians friendly to the West
would welcome secret American intervention which might assist them
in attaining their individual or group political ambitions and are in-
clined to believe in the absence of United States interference on their be-
half that the United States must be supporting rival politicians.
“Iranian distrust of foreigners is so intense that it is not difficult to
stimulate resentment against any foreigners engaged in activities in
Iran even though these activities are clearly beneficial to Iran. There-
fore, the more American nationals there are in Iran and the more energetic and
conspicuous these Americans are, the easier it is for various Iranian elements
who dislike the presence of Americans or who wish to create difficulties be-
tween the United States and Iran to incite Iranians to violence against United
States citizens in Iran. It is only fair to the Prime Minister to point out
that undoubtedly one of the reasons why he has been so anxious that a
minimum amount of publicity be given to activities, beneficial though
they may be to Iran, of the so-called American military advisers and of
TCI personnel is his awareness that the more attention that is attracted
to the activities of these American nationals the more susceptible the
Iranian people in general are likely to be to appeals to throw the Amer-
icans out of the country. It is difficult, of course, for the average Amer-
ican to understand the lack of appreciation of the Iranian public of dis-
interested efforts made by individual American nationals in Iran for the
benefit of Iran. There are historical and psychological reasons for this
phenomenon which I shall not attempt to set forth in this despatch.
Nevertheless those in the United States who are inclined to believe that
1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, Box 32, Iran 1953–59(9). Secret; Secu-
rity Information. There is no drafting information on the memorandum.
