304
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
At their meeting, Senator Long told Ambassador Byrne that he
wants a 100% settlement, which the Czechoslovak Government would
almost certainly reject out of hand. In lieu of a 100% settlement, Long
wants the U.S. Government unilaterally to vest the Czechoslovak gold
in its possession and to use the proceeds to satisfy U.S. claimants. Long
said this should cause the Czechoslovaks no real problem since, once
this issue was out of the way, the road would then be clear for them
to receive MFN and USG credits. According to Long, the value of MFN
and credits for Czechoslovakia would far exceed the value of the lost
gold. Such action would violate international law and our treaty obliga-
tions and would create serious difficulties with Great Britain and
France, our fellow Tripartite Commission members, which have
already agreed to the return of the gold to Czechoslovakia. Advised
of the likelihood of such difficulties, Long recommended linking British
and French acquiescence in vesting the gold to the status of the Con-
corde, implying that an amendment to a tax bill could effectively ban
the Concorde. Long also reiterated that he would like to talk with the
Secretary about this claims/gold issue.
103.
Memorandum From Robert King of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, March 27, 1978
SUBJECT
State Department Suggestion to Make a New Proposal to the Czechoslovak
Government on the Claims/Gold Problem and Implement an Exchanges
Agreement
At Matt Nimitz’s suggestion, a memo is being circulated in State
that, if cleared, would be sent to Secretary Vance by George Vest
recommending that the US present a new proposal to the Czechoslovak
government to resolve the Claims/Gold issue and that a program
document be negotiated which would permit the signing of the
exchanges agreement with Czechoslovakia that was negotiated in 1976.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
File, Box 17, Czechoslovakia: 1/77–1/81. Confidential. Sent for action. Aaron wrote at
the top of the memorandum “ZB—The idea is [to] reward them[?] for their [?] position
[at] Belgrade.”
