730
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
counted, “gave me a draft of a joint statement to be issued by him and
Carter. I read it grimly. It tried to paper over the harsh reality that after
the Camp David summit, the Blair House talks, the ministerial sessions
at Camp David, my rescue mission to Cairo and Jerusalem, Begin’s visit
to Washington and the president’s trip to the Middle East, we had
failed to bridge the last narrow gap.” “The remaining three issues,”
Vance contended, “seemed so insignificant compared to the prize that
could be seized with a little flexibility and imagination.” (Vance, Hard
Choices, pages 248–249)
On the evening of March 12, Vance met again with Israeli Minister
for Foreign Affairs Moshe Dayan at the King David Hotel. No memo-
randum of conversation or official record of the meeting has been
found, but Vance and Dayan recorded the substance of the exchange in
their respective memoirs. (Vance, Hard Choices, pages 249–250; Dayan,
Breakthrough, pages 275–276) During the meeting, lasting “several
hours,” Dayan “urged me [Vance] to persuade the Egyptians that we
should drop the idea of Gaza first and make no mention of Egyptian li-
aison officers in the West Bank and Gaza letter. He stressed that the
Egyptians could propose advancing elections in Gaza (“Gaza first”) at
the autonomy negotiations. He also underscored that when Israel with-
drew from El Arish and normal relations began, ‘any Egyptian could
travel to Gaza on an Israeli visa, just as any Israeli would be able to go
to Cairo on an Egyptian visa.’ I was prepared to accept Dayan’s sugges-
tion if we could reach an agreement on the oil supplies question.” On
oil, Dayan told Vance he “understood that the Egyptians could not
agree at this time to sell Israel oil on a long-term basis and at a preferred
price.” “When I heard this,” Vance later recalled, “I knew that we were
approaching a breakthrough.” Dayan suggested to Vance that Carter
invite Begin to a breakfast meeting the following morning, March 13;
Vance telephoned the President who immediately agreed to the sug-
gestion. (Vance, Hard Choices, pages 249–250)
After this, Vance and Dayan “turned to constructing the final
pillars of the bridge.” Vance asked Dayan “what Israel could live with
in terms of U.S. guarantees. He replied that it would be necessary for
the U.S. oil guarantee to last for twenty years rather than the five we
had offered. I said I felt we could move in his direction on this. Dayan
said further that there must be a clause in the treaty stating that Israel
had a right to buy oil directly from Egypt. He pointed out that without
such a clause the Egyptian boycott would remain in effect. It would be
difficult to do, but I felt we could draft language to meet his point and
persuade the Egyptians to accept it. I so indicated to him, saying I
would, of course, have to discuss these matters with the president but
that I was hopeful.” After gaining the President’s approval for a U.S. oil
guarantee to Israel for a fifteen-year period and for the revisions to
