1194 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI departures and returns of deployed rail-mobile ICBM launchers for routine movements; departures and returns for rail-mobile test launchers and deployed mobile launchers; exercise and operational dispersals; variation from a standard configuration of trains with deployed rail-mobile ICBM launchers and their associated missiles; data on ICBM and SLBM throw-weight as required by the Throw-weight Protocol; information on conversion and elimination of Treaty-limited items; and information on new types of ICBMs, SLBMs, and heavy bombers. CONVERSION OR ELIMINATION OF TREATY-LIMITED ITEMS In order to provide assurance that each Party has met the various limits set forth in the Treaty, the Parties are required to eliminate specified Treaty-limited items or to convert them to items not governed by the Treaty’s central limits in accordance with procedures established in the Treaty. Most elimination activity is to take place at conversion or elimination facilities. Fixed launchers of ICBMs and fixed structures housing mobile launchers of ICBMs subject to elimination are eliminated in situ. The Treaty expressly provides for verification of conversion and elimination by inspection as well as by national technical means. The Conversion or Elimination Protocol sets forth specific means for conducting conversion or elimination of mobile ICBMs and their launchers, silo launchers and SLBM launchers, and heavy bombers and certain associated equipment and structures. Techniques include cutting, flattening, destroying by explosion and modifying weapons bays. TELEMETRY The Parties are required to make on-board technical measurements and to broadcast all telemetric information obtained from such measurements during each flight test of an ICBM or SLBM. With limited exceptions, no activity, including encryption, encapsulation, or jamming, that denies full access to telemetric information during flight tests of ICBMs or SLBMs is permitted. In addition, the Parties will exchange tapes of the telemetry recorded on each flight test and information that will assist in understanding that telemetry. These provisions are a major breakthrough in openness and transparency. The Parties have voluntarily committed to cease using encryption and jamming techniques for one year, beginning 120 days after signature (November 28, 1991). VERIFICATION BY NATIONAL TECHNICAL MEANS The Treaty provides for verification by national technical means of verification and prohibits use of measures of concealment or other measures that would interfere with such means. Upon request, the Parties are also required to conduct various cooperative measures to facilitate national technical means of verification, including display in the open of road-mobile launchers of ICBMs in restricted areas, of rail-mobile
