370  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
would be OSI rights because this was the range of energies where there 
would be concern about decoupling explosions of 150 kt. Above 50, 
there would be a choice between hydrodynamic and supplementing 
NTM with seismic.
Palenykh said that the U.S. side seemed for the first time to be call-
ing for the use of seismic only above 50 kt. This required consultations 
with experts before the Soviet side could provide a response.
Robinson said it was correct that the U.S. had not previously agreed 
to accept seismic under any condition. In connection with the PNET, we 
had discussed 35–50 kt.
Palenykh said there was a difference between explosions at test sites 
and PNEs at unknown places.
Robinson said the possibility for decoupling existed regardless of 
location. The possibilities for decoupling were man-­made.
Palenykh said he didn’t know whether this would be a sticking 
point. They would need to speak to specialists.
Robinson asked whether the problem was the trigger for seismic or 
CORRTEX or both.
Karpov said both, also the 35 kt trigger for OSI. The Soviet side 
believed seismic was useful at any level, even below 50.
Robinson said he thought the Soviet side had suggested a 75-­kt trig-
ger for seismic.
Karpov said there was a misunderstanding.
Bartholomew said that, if the Soviet side was saying seismic could 
be used for every shot regardless of yield, then this would call into 
question the basis for the U.S. proposal. The two sides did not seem as 
far advanced as he had expected. Concluding the session, Bartholomew 
asked the participants to keep open the possibility of meeting again 
later that evening.
51.	
Editorial Note
On September 23, 1989, Secretary of State James Baker and Soviet 
Foreign Minister Eduard Shevardnadze and their delegations met at 
the AMK Ranch in Jackson Hole, Wyoming, from 11:30 a.m.–1:00 p.m., 
to consider the reports of the ministerial’s bilateral working groups on 
bilateral and transnational issues. The memorandum of conversation is 
scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, vol. III, Soviet 
Union, Russia, and Post-Soviet States: High-Level Contacts.
