Chapter 6, June–December 1990  891
Instead of being destroyed, such ICBMs and SLBMs will be transferred 
to the category of non-­deployed missiles.
2. There shall be a limit of 250 non-­deployed ICBMs for mobile 
launchers of ICBMs, of which no more than half may be non-­deployed 
ICBMs for rail-­mobile launchers of ICBMs.
A. This limit shall apply to silo-­based and mobile Peacekeeper 
ICBMs, silo-­based and mobile SS–24 ICBMs, and silo-­based and 
mobile SS–25 ICBMs, as well as to both silo-­based and mobile 
variants of any future type of ICBM for mobile launchers of 
ICBMs.
B. Non-­deployed ICBMs of types subject to numerical limits 
on non-­deployed missiles which exceed those numerical limits 
shall be converted or eliminated.
3. All non-­deployed ICBMs, whether or not subject to numerical 
restrictions, and all non-­deployed SLBMs will be subject to the appro-
priate locational and reporting requirements now being worked out in 
Geneva.
4. When non-­deployed ICBMs of types subject to numerical lim-
its on non-­deployed missiles are eliminated, they shall be converted 
or eliminated using the procedures now agreed in the Protocol on 
Conversion or Elimination. Each side shall decide for itself the timing 
of and the procedures for the elimination of SLBMs or of ICBMs not 
subject to numerical limits on non-­deployed missiles. Inspection of the 
elimination of SLBMs or of ICBMs not subject to numerical limits on 
non-­deployed missiles shall not be required. Notification of such elim-
ination shall be provided.
5. Perimeter and Portal Continuous Monitoring (PPCM) shall 
apply to all types of ICBMs subject to numerical limits on non-­deployed 
missiles. Details, including what specific facilities shall be subject to 
monitoring, shall be agreed.
6. ICBMs and SLBMs subject to the Treaty which have been con-
verted for space launch shall be used only for purposes consistent with 
existing international obligations undertaken by the two Parties.
7. The Preamble to the START Treaty will include a reference to 
Article XI of the ABM Treaty, Article VI of the Non-Proliferation Treaty 
and the Washington Summit Joint Statement of June 1, 1990, with 
respect to the undertaking in those documents to continue active nego-
tiations on strategic offensive arms.
8. The START Treaty will not include any Agreed statements refer-
ring to the ABM Treaty.
