121.5763/2
[Document 178]
The Minister in Austria (Washburn) to the Secretary of State
VIENNA, July 31, 1925.
[Received August 17.]
No. 775
SIR: Referring to the Department’s instruction No. 735 [731] of April 21, 1925, in
relation to the diplomatic recognition of Customs Representatives or Attachés, and my
reply telegram No. 25 of May 13, 1925, 7 p.m.,69 I have the honor to submit the
following report: The above-mentioned Department instruction was received at this
Legation on May 6. I made oral representations to the Foreign Minister, Dr. Mataja, on
May 8. At that time, he gave me the oral assurances upon which my telegram was
based in almost these precise words: “I know the story, we are not delighted at the
prospect. (Wir sind gar nicht entzückt davon.) But it does not seem to me that the
matter is of great importance to us. I am willing, in view of what you say, that
diplomatic recognition should be accorded. We will do it quietly, and the less we say
about it the better.” The following day, May 9, I addressed a confirmatory note to Dr.
Mataja in which I took occasion to outline the duties of the Attachés in accordance with
the hereinbefore-mentioned Department instruction No. 731. A copy of this note is
enclosed herewith marked Annex 1.69 It will be observed that I distinctly stated therein
that the Foreign Minister had been “good enough to say that it was agreeable to the
Austrian Government to recognize such agents”. There is no controversy about this, but
I emphasize it in order that the Department may fully understand my telegram No. 25.
Some time later in the month of May, in talking with Sektionschef Dr. Wildner to
whom, as I knew, the matter had been referred, I became aware of some hitch, and it
presently developed that the under-officials of the Foreign Office had taken the stand
that official courtesy and procedure required that the interested departments of the
Government, viz., the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Commerce, should be
invited to express their opinions. The Chamber of Commerce had, I learned, in turn
communicated with various Austrian Chambers of Commerce, and it was evident that
some protest rumblings had been heard, especially from a Vienna firm the importation
of whose goods into the United States had under the law been prohibited. Nevertheless,
Dr. Wildner did not seem to me to be inherently hostile, and I argued the matter with
him at some length. He finally said to me, “If you will embody what you have said to
me in a note which I can use with the Ministry of Commerce, I think it quite possible
that the explanations you have made will overcome the existing objections.” He gave
