324 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I but for 75 years, no Panamanian government has ever wanted to close the canal. Panama wants the canal open and neutral—perhaps even more than we do. The canal’s continued operation is very important to us, but it is much more than that to Panama. To Panama, it’s crucial. Much of her economy flows directly or indirectly from the canal. Panama would be no more likely to neglect or to close the canal than we would be to close the Interstate Highway System here in the United States. In an open and free referendum last October, which was monitored very carefully by the United Nations, the people of Panama gave the new treaties their support. The major threat to the canal comes not from any government of Panama, but from misguided persons who may try to fan the flames of dissatisfaction with the terms of the old treaty. There’s a final question—about the deeper meaning of the treaties themselves, to us and to Panama. Recently, I discussed the treaties with David McCullough, author of “The Path Between the Seas,” the great history of the Panama Canal.8 He believes that the canal is something that we built and have looked after these many years; it is “ours” in that sense, which is very different from just ownership. So, when we talk of the canal, whether we are old, young, for or against the treaties, we are talking about very deep and elemental feelings about our own strength. Still, we Americans want a more humane and stable world. We believe in good will and fairness, as well as strength. This agreement with Panama is something we want because we know it is right. This is not merely the surest way to protect and save the canal, it’s a strong, positive act of a people who are still confident, still creative, still great. This new partnership can become a source of national pride and self-respect in much the same way that building the canal was 75 years ago. It’s the spirit in which we act that is so very important. Theodore Roosevelt, who was President when America built the canal, saw history itself as a force, and the history of our own time and the changes it has brought would not be lost on him. He knew that change was inevitable and necessary. Change is growth. The true conservative, he once remarked, keeps his face to the future. But if Theodore Roosevelt were to endorse the treaties, as I’m quite sure he would, it would be mainly because he could see the decision as 8 The Path Between the Seas: The Creation of the Panama Canal, 1870–1914 (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1977).
