February 1951–February 1952
147
position in favor of Seyyed Zia Tabatabai. At Mossadeq’s request the
Shah has ordered the Princess Ashraf out of the country (she left in late
September 1951), thereby showing that he would no longer (that is, for
the time being) condone court intrigues in political matters.
E. The Tudeh Party and peace front organizations are backing
Mossadeq, albeit only on specific issues. As long as Mossadeq’s policy
remains intransigent against the British, the Tudeh is behind Mos-
sadeq. The Tudeh does not appear to be in the mood at this time to
make life difficult for the government, as evidenced by the fact that the
Tudeh apparently accepted the police order not to celebrate publicly
the tenth anniversary of the founding of the Party (3–7 October 1951).
3. The British position in Iran has collapsed.
A. [1 paragraph (13 lines) not declassified]
B. The influence of the British Embassy upon the Shah and his
courtiers has practically ceased to exist, mainly because the Shah is in-
creasingly aware of the strength of the “streets”, and fears the “streets”
at present more than he fears the British. No other Prime Minister prior
to Mossadeq could claim such sponsorship. The Shah dares not talk
back or step out of line. He is fully aware now that the political wave
which brought Mossadeq into power was in great part an anti-court
wave.
C. The campaign of intimidation supported by certain elements of
the National Front and condoned by Mullah Kashani (but not con-
doned by Mossadeq) has contributed toward current elimination of
British-sponsored opposition. (See also paragraph 2 a above.)
4. The Soviet Union is in a relatively strong position to reap
advantages.
A. The Tudeh Party has great potentialities. Although inside infor-
mation is inadequate, the following clues are important:
(1) As early as 1946 the Tudeh had organized workers in Abadan
to a point where they successfully staged a general strike.
(2) Since the Razmara cabinet, the Tudeh has enjoyed greater
freedom of action with correspondingly increased efficiency.
(3) In 1950 the Tudeh organized peace front groups.
(4) In December 1950 the Tudeh was in a position to stage the es-
cape of ten of its leaders from the Tehran jail.
(5) In April 1951 the Tudeh quickly took advantage of the inepti-
tude of British labor relations in Abadan to stage another successful
general strike.
(6) In July 1951 the Tudeh was able to mass ten thousand demon-
strators in the streets of Tehran and organize them in semi-military
order.
