to extend amnesty as to most of the grave crimes, which are likely to be
disclosed by the Superior Liquidating Commission.” (This objection is now
out of place, because the Law pending excludes said cases from the
Amnesty, in paragraph 3 of Section (a) of Article I.) “I know of no measure
that would strike more directly and effectively at the financial credit of
Cuba, at a time when every effort is being made to restore public
confidence.” (The words underlined refer to a moment which has already
passed.) “No amnesty bill will be passed at the present session of
Congress.”
In the communication of November 10th, Your Excellency said: “It would
be very unfortunate if any Amnesty legislation were passed by the Cuban
Congress pending the loan negotiations. This is an inopportune time to
agitate the question of amnesty.”
Your communication of December 9th, more lengthy than the two previous
ones, was for the purpose of suggesting your points of view in connection
with the amnesty then pending, “in order that they may be the cause of
revision by such persons whose services I might request, and whose
knowledge in the matter and in the application of the Law might be better
than your own.” It is precisely the line of conduct which I have followed,
because I consider your friendly advice as proper, and, after obtaining a
delay of nearly three years, I have succeeded in reducing in an
extraordinary manner the extension of the benefits of the amnesty.
It will suffice, to demonstrate this, that on December 9, 1921, when Your
Excellency examined Article I of the Project of Law pending, listed up to
29 crimes or faults as included in the amnesty; and in the present Law, after
my efforts with the Members of the Mixed Committee of Congress, they
have been reduced to 17, and of these cases, there are two which have not
given rise to sentences.
Article II of the former Project has been left out entirely.
Article I of the Law pending, in Section (b), does not seem to me to deserve
the commentaries which Your Excellency makes, because it unquestionably
presents a wide range to doubt of the justice or equity of a sentence of
