48 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement mean they actually left. It is entirely possible some still in US; I did not know. If they are it is of own free will and their departure not being pre­ vented. Some of these might have departed US for other places. We have no way of knowing. Remaining cases referred to in announcement that restraining orders on 76 lifted have now been completed and no Chinese now being prevented leaving US including Dr. Tsien. I told Wang Dept’s April 2 press release dealt primarily with question Chinese students who apply to US Government for help in paying transportation to China. As I pointed out US Government had paid or assisted in paying travel of hundreds of those who returned China. That announcement mentioned lifting of restraining orders against 76 Chinese students in context of reassuring Chinese in US desiring obtain transportation from US Gov­ ernment and against whom restraining orders had been issued that they need have no hesitation make application. I expressed appreciation for receipt information on Mrs. Huizer, adding that Wang undoubtedly familiar, like all persons in diplomatic service, with matter of dual nationality. I said that while our nationality laws very complicated, in general, since 1922 any American woman marrying alien retains nationality under our law. In many cases under law of husband’s country she may also have acquired his nationality. She sometimes will apply for pass­ port of husband’s nationality and sometimes for American passport. Under our law this does not affect fact that by our law she is American citizen. This is Mrs. Huizer’s case and we desire extend protection to her as American national even though she also may have Dutch passport. Wang replied that as previously stated he had repeatedly indicated his pleasure at learning that US Government had rescinded restrictions on Chinese nationals in US. However according his info actual state of affairs was at variance with what I had said. He desired clarify possible misunderstanding my part his government’s position regarding Chi­ nese in US. It was not that his government dissatisfied in past because Chinese students under restrictions and now dissatisfied again because they compelled leave too fast. Dissatisfaction is based on fact that they should have been able return and had not yet returned. For long period US Government restricted Chinese. Now that restrictions rescinded Chinese nationals notified to leave before cer­ tain date which left them following alternatives: (1) deportation proce­ dure if failed leave before deadline; (2) apply for permanent residence if wanted avoid difficulties of alternative (1). Wang said he cited case Dr. Tsien because well known, but this only one example. His appeal for help in letter June 15 shows he not free to leave at that time. Further­ more Chinese nationals faced with series of difficulties such as financial visa booking tickets etc. All these factors affect their freedom to depart. May be possible under these conditions some dare not express desire
