838 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 a means of circumventing the sanctions.5 Six of these involve U.S. companies. We are unable to determine from the intelligence the size of these transactions. Also, because of legal rules on use of intelligence, NSA will not provide the names of the U.S. companies to Treasury for possible enforcement without a prior ruling by Justice. The SCC agreed that the DCI should make available to the State Department the names of foreign companies involved in this trade, and State will raise the issue on a classified basis with the governments concerned. The SCC also agreed that Treasury should be provided the names of the companies for purposes of a preliminary investigation to determine the magnitude of the trade by U.S. entities. Based on this preliminary investigation, a further decision will be taken by the SCC about any possible enforcement action. (TS) Approve.6 Disapprove contacting foreign governments. Disapprove use of intelligence information for a preliminary investigation of illegal U.S. trade by Treasury. 5. Security Council Resolution on ICJ Decision.7 Ambassador McHenry has been conducting consultations in New York about the possible introduction of a SC resolution incorporating the ICJ decision ordering Iran to release the U.S. hostages. McHenry believes that, if we are willing to press the issue, we can probably get nine votes in the SC for such a resolution. However, he has been advised against such a resolution by the Chinese, the British and Bangladesh. The Soviets have also indicated that the SC debate—and possibly the resolution—would have to deal with the U.S. rescue attempt as well as the ICJ decision. Other nations have also mentioned the likelihood of the rescue mission being discussed. Mr. Christopher said, based on these findings, he would not recommend going ahead with a SC resolution at this time. Such a resolution would almost certainly do nothing to help the hostages, and there is nothing which would justify proceeding at this time. We might wish to proceed with a resolution in the event of an actionforcing development such as the Iranians starting trials. Mr. Cutler said it had been five weeks since the ICJ decision. That was surely long 5 According to Turner’s talking points for the July 1 meeting, the allies were not intentionally allowing violations of sanctions, but “loose wording, liberal translations, and outright clandestine circumvention is resulting in a large-scale continuation of shipments to Iran from sanction participants. We doubt the Allies would take the steps necessary to effectively close or substantially narrow these loopholes.” (Talking Points for 1 July 1980 SCC Meeting, “Allied Honoring of Sanctions Against Iran,” undated; Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence, Job 81B00401R: Subject Files of the Presidential Briefing Coordinator, Box 13, Folder 3: SCC Meeting Iran) 6 Carter approved this option with a checkmark and initialed “J” in the right margin. 7 See footnote 7, Document 291.
