504
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
194.
Message from the Swiss Ambassador to Iran (Lang) to the
Department of State1
Tehran, March 3, 1980
Analysis of Political Situation
I have taken advantage of V’s visit to compare my ideas and what
I have learned about the situation with his to allow you to judge the
situation and estimate possibilities for solving the crisis and consolidat-
ing the country.
1. We are unanimous on the following conclusion: there is no
government. Legitimacy and the institutionalization of power which
were slightly strengthened over the last few weeks are again in the
process of being called into question by a combination of opposing
and parallel forces.
2. By way of example, I would like to cite the discussion that my
translator had a few days ago at the compound. It is instructive in
more ways than one. His interlocutors (the “kids”) told him that they
would do everything they could to see to it that power did not become
centralized, that power did not become stronger. It is thanks to the
fact that there are many parallel forces (he said specifically about 20)
in Iran that imperialism can no longer exert pressure on the country
(that went especially for the United States but also for the Soviet Union).
Look, they said, if Carter wants to pressure us, he can, what good does
it do him to pressure Bani-Sadr, he only has a minute fraction of the
power. If Carter wants to make a deal he will have to have the agree-
ment of all 20 and that will be very difficult.
3. Such a vision is not merely that of the fundamentalists: the
radical left, the Communists, the ethnic minorities all have an interest
in this fragmentation of power which ensues from some endless de-
stabilization which will allow the necessary conditions for bringing
about the second revolution, whereas for others it means a chance to
live under de facto local autonomy in the absence of any central power.
4. V, in his discussions with Bani-Sadr on the outcome of the
elections, still observes optimism, but tempered optimism. Bani-Sadr
realizes that he has very little chance of winning the kind of victory
he did in the Presidential election, and foresees the religious fundamen-
talists winning quite a few seats. But he has worked out a new tactic
to get together with the more powerful candidates to get their support
1 Source: Department of State, Official Files of [P] David D. Newsom, Under Secre-
tary of State for Political Affairs, Lot 82D85, Iran Update Mar 1980. Secret; Sensitive.
The document was found attached to a March 4 memorandum from Saunders to Vance,
Christopher, and Newsom entitled “Iran Update—March 5, 1980.”
