704
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
RECOMMENDATIONS
I. Continue Relief
Agencies supporting continued relief argue that:
1. Extension of relief will provide more time for the industry to
achieve benefits from the planned and implemented technological
product innovations. Terminating relief during this economic recession
could deny them some of these benefits.
2. Substantial idle color TV capacity exists in Korea and Taiwan
which could result in a major increase in imports if U.S. import restric-
tions are completely lifted.
3. Failure to grant relief would make the United States the only
major world market open to unrestricted import competition in color
TVs.
4. Job loss in the industry could accelerate if relief is terminated.
5. Although relief has been in effect for the past 3 years in the case
of Japan, and one and one-half years in the case of Korea and Taiwan,
prices of color TVs have been stable relative to prices of most other
articles.
All but one agency supporting continued relief recommend that
you authorize USTR to seek to negotiate orderly marketing agreements
(OMAs) with Korea and Taiwan at a combined level of 800,000 to
850,000 for the first year and 850,000 to 975,000 in the second year.
These OMAs would not include incomplete receivers without picture
tubes and receivers of a screen size 12 inches or less. Both exclusions
represent a substantial liberalization of the existing relief. In addition,
the Japanese OMA would be terminated; although we would indicate
to Japan that any surges from recent levels could lead to U.S. restric-
tions. We would monitor the other countries to be in a position to pre-
vent surges.
In the event that we cannot reach agreement by June 30, it is rec-
ommended that you implement a global quota of 1.4 million complete
sets (including incomplete sets with picture tubes) the first year and
1.55 million in the second. This quota would exclude the same products
as the OMAs. The quota would have indicative levels for individual
countries to limit disproportionate surges.
The agencies supporting extension of relief feel that this proposal
would:
(a) provide a meaningful extension of relief;
(b) meet the concerns of Korea and Taiwan who have been se-
verely restrained under the existing relief;
(c) continue the restructuring of the industry without significant
inflationary consequences.
