1956  1191
Based on the reaction to the correspondents’ question they probably 
estimate it will even obtain considerable response in the U.S. I, there­
fore, look to their releasing it as quickly as they can complete the basis 
for doing so.
We have been speculating on what they might next try along this 
line. It has occurred to us that one possibility would be a proposal from 
them for a technical arrangement, understanding, or something else of 
this nature to avoid such incidents as the shooting down of the Naval 
patrol plane. This has many possible ramifications which would lend 
themselves to exploitation by them if we refused to consider it.
Wang’s tone at today’s meeting was that of injured innocence, trying 
to make it as hard as he could for me to take a tough line. You will see that 
he did not even mention Chinese in the U.S.
I suppose our telegrams crossed with regard to their press release 
yesterday, but I was happy to see we were in entire agreement. I was 
under considerable pressure to say something here on it, but decided not 
to do so as it did not contain anything new that required immediate cor­
rection, they fairly accurately representing the fact that we had refused to 
discuss trade. Also, I had previously told you I was not going to put out 
anything here. Although I had said this on the assumption I would be in 
Prague when the release was made, I feared I might cross wires with the 
Department. I also thought it was such a dud of a statement that it would 
only serve to build it up if I did say anything.
However, I still feel they are building toward a major move around 
election time, and that a continuation of the present trend will at least 
result in their terminating or suspending the talks shortly after the elec­
tions as a means of attempting to bring increased pressure on us.
Thanks very much for the full information on the prisoner inter­
views contained in your letter of Sept. 13. I thoroughly agree that the 
Red Cross seems to have done an excellent job and I have all the material 
necessary to exploit and defend the results.
I suppose it will be some time until we know the results of the 
efforts to send reading material to the remaining prisoners but will be 
interested in hearing when we know.
I thoroughly agree with para 8 of Col. Monroe’s interesting mem­
orandum on his talks with the MAC. As far as practical results are con­
cerned we cannot expect to obtain anything more here than what I have 
already obtained, that is, renewal of discussion in the MAC. It seems to 
me the most promising line of action is the suggestion that a sub-­group 
of the MAC fully armed with every available fact on every individual 
undertake a straight-­forward case by case approach to each individual.
I have sent you the memo of my conversation with Senator 
Mansfield. As you will see nothing unusual or difficult developed.
