United States is entirely willing that all parties to the Locarno
treaties should become parties to its proposed anti-war treaty
either through signature in the first instance or by immediate
accession to the treaty as soon as it comes into force in the
manner provided in Article III of the American draft, and it will
offer no objection when and if such a suggestion is made.
(4) Treaties of neutrality. The United States is not informed as to
the precise treaties which France has in mind and cannot therefore
discuss their provisions. It is not unreasonable to suppose,
however, that the relations between France and the states whose
neutrality she has guaranteed are sufficiently close and intimate to
make it possible for France to persuade such states to adhere
seasonably to the anti-war treaty proposed by the United States. If
this were done no party to the anti-war treaty could attack the
neutralized states without violating the treaty and thereby
automatically freeing France and the other Powers in respect of
the treaty-breaking state from the obligations of the anti-war
treaty. If the neutralized states were attacked by a state not a party
to the anti-war treaty, the latter treaty would of course have no
bearing and France would be as free to act under the treaties
guaranteeing neutrality as if she were not a party to the anti-war
treaty. It is difficult to perceive, therefore, how treaties
guaranteeing neutrality can be regarded as necessarily preventing
the conclusion by France or any other power of a multilateral
treaty for the renunciation of war.
(5) Relations with a treaty-breaking state. As indicated above,
there can be no question as a matter of law that violation of a
multilateral anti-war treaty through resort to war by one party
thereto would automatically release the other parties from their
obligations to the treaty-breaking state. Any express recognition
of this principle of law is wholly unnecessary.
(6) Universality. From the beginning it has been the hope of the
United States that its proposed multilateral anti-war treaty should
be world-wide in its application, and appropriate provision there
