890
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
333.
Paper Prepared by the Head of the Iran Working Group,
Department of State (Saunders)1
Washington, undated
PAPERS NOW IN TRAIN
In the light of the emerging situation in Tehran and following
Friday’s PRC meeting2 we have set for ourselves the following work
agenda for the next few days in order to refine our approaches to the
main openings we may have to deal with:
—Bob Owen and I have reviewed with our colleagues the work
on claims settlement that was done back in February, and Bob is now
developing a series of position papers which would each include three
elements: a simple statement of our position as it could be conveyed
to the Iranians; a layman’s explanation of the position which could be
used as argument in a negotiation; whatever more detailed legal or
technical material might be necessary as back-up in coordinating the
positions of State, Justice, Treasury and NSC. The series of position
papers would lead from an optimal settlement to our bottom-line
fallback.
—A second series of papers in similar format would deal with
responses on the Shah’s assets, whatever they may be.
—We will develop the strategy options for dealing with hostage trials
along the lines discussed in the PRC. This paper would discuss our
broader options in response to the possibility of trials.
—As a more specialized paper in conjunction with the paper on
trials, Bob would review the extensive work done during the winter
and develop a paper on the question of providing counsel for the hostages
if there are trials.
—We are working with Brian Atwood and colleagues on a paper
dealing with the shape of possible Congressional initiatives. In addition to
the Congressional letter which has already been delivered and Rafsan-
jani’s response,3 there are glimmers of other possible moves involving
members of Congress, and we will be developing our own thoughts
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
File, Box 33, Iran Update 8/80. Secret; Sensitive. Attached to an August 3 briefing
memorandum from Saunders to Muskie, Christopher, and Newsom.
2 See Document 331.
3 See Documents 309 and 329.
