Chapter 3, June 1989–January 1990 297 counting of “conventional” former heavy bombers, and the Soviet sublimit on bomber weapons. The Soviets have also explained their “viewing site” concept—­the analog at heavy bomber production facilities of PPM at ICBM production facilities. Reactions here are generally lukewarm, but it could provide a path to agreement which avoids more intrusive types of heavy bomber OSI. — Unit of Account As with Read Hanmer last year, Rick believes we should settle the silly unit of account issue, which continues to cause many problems in the text. Looked at objectively, launchers is a more logical unit than missiles, since the launcher is generally all that is seen, with the presence of a missile inside assumed. The primacy of launchers is seen most clearly in the mobiles context, where it is the launcher whose mobility is the key unique feature of the whole system. It is also interesting to note that we correctly limit launchers at space launch facilities for launching converted ICBMs and SLBMs, but not the converted missiles themselves. In any case, both sides are in full agreement that both launchers and missiles are being constrained and there is a 1-­to-­1 correspondence between launchers and deployed missiles. Non-­deployed missiles are, of course, limited separately. A few years ago, the issue was always posed as whether missiles or launchers would be “the” unit of account. Now, of course, there are many units of account and all of our concerns about units have been resolved, except the rather irrational negative reaction to salt II units. We should either accept launchers in place of deployed missiles, (possibly in return the Soviet concessions on other minor related issues, e.g. that there are no non-­deployed heavy bombers) or devise a hybrid unit which includes both, such as “launchers and their associated missiles.” — The Verification/Stability Measures In spite of a great deal of time and effort, both here and in Washington, we have little to show on this. We need to continue to pursue this subject, of course, and I believe the Soviet response will be largely positive. However, there is a real risk that they will add elements that are unacceptable to us and we will get bogged down in a long and painful side negotiation. We should be prepared to drop any measures which seem to be leading us into such a morass and concentrate on those which can lead to a relatively quick result. — Mobiles The Soviets have been extremely forthcoming on mobiles here, answering all our questions quite straightforwardly and making some concessions. Even if we are not yet ready to allow mobiles, it is time to narrow some of the differences in the emerging verification regime and
