North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
819
IDENTIFYING THE POOR: This task is not as easy as might appear
at first glance. Because the poor often inhabit a non-monetary,
non-recorded world, their exact living conditions are not known. Sec-
ondly, poverty is relative: a person with a $500 income in the slums of
Rio may feel poorer than someone with a $75 income in rural India.
Cross-cultural definitions of poverty must be viewed skeptically. It will
be essential to involve local organizations that are in close touch with—
if not composed of—people from poverty backgrounds; such groups
can help identify the needy and assist social scientists in devising
surveys to reflect indigenous concerns.
THE MONETARY COST: Developmentalists now cite specific esti-
mates for the budgetary costs of boosting global living standards be-
yond a minimum level—one common figure is $125 billion in foreign
assistance (IFI’s plus OECD bilateral), to be disbursed to the poor coun-
tries over a ten-to-fifteen-year period. The models these figures are de-
rived from are so crude as to be considered worthless by many. Starting
at the individual country level in order to calculate the amount of re-
sources required to satisfy basic human needs is a more promising ap-
proach, since one at least can take into account specific political and
cultural factors, and an economic environment can be posited.
DELIVERING SERVICES: In most LDC’s the benefits accruing
from social services flow to the privileged groups, as does the distribu-
tion of income. One cannot assume that aid programs categorized as,
say, health, agriculture, or education necessarily benefit the poor. Con-
tinued vigilance will be necessary to “audit” the strategy.
PROGRAM DEVELOPMENT: Designing—and implementing—
programs that will reach the poor are relatively untried tasks. Progress,
therefore, will have to proceed at a modest pace, and those hoping for
the quick fix will be disappointed. The ultimate impact of a particular
program may not be apparent. For example, raising the price of food
produced by the rural poor can result in pressure for higher urban
wages which are passed on in higher prices for industrial products, in-
cluding those purchased by the poor farmers: the net income effect may
be negligible. Higher wages may benefit some workers but prevent
others from being hired. Projects cannot be implemented in isolation:
their side effects must be carefully traced through the individual
country’s economic and institutional structures.
RAISING PRODUCTIVITY: The peasant cannot be productive
without land, nor can the industrial worker produce without a job. So-
cial restraints on productivity are often monumental. The basic-human-
needs agenda, therefore, raises the tough issues of land reform, insuffi-
cient land and uneconomic holdings in the country, and restrictive
union practices, massive educated unemployment and social inhibi-
tions on manual labor by the educated in the cities. The Alliance for
