1956  717
62. I said I did not feel any proposals I had made sacrificed or prej­
udiced their views with regard this dispute. I thought for his govern­
ment to read such meaning into proposals I had made gave it meaning 
not there at all and not intended be there.
63. I said on other hand, as negotiations have developed on this 
and in light statements he made here and again made this morning and 
public statements made by his government, seems very clear that what 
his government attempting do is demand that in this declaration US 
renounce its views on our dispute.
64. I said he perfectly free oppose those views. I not asking him 
agree to them. He free oppose them in any peaceful way.
65. I said what I saying was that it would be complete perversion 
original purpose this declaration and something to which US could and 
would not agree—to renounce in this declaration its views.
66. I said seemed very clear me they thus asking US do something 
that entirely unreasonable, something we not asking them do.
67. I said that was putting situation as I saw it just as clearly and 
plainly as I could.
68. Wang said he had given number of illustrations this morning in 
order help understanding situation we now facing. Of course nobody 
would deny fact US participated in struggle against Naziism. Nobody 
would deny fact US also suffered attack by Japanese and was thus com­
pelled join in battle against Japan. People have recognized contribu­
tions made US in struggle both in East and West and Chinese people 
have been in very good cooperation in operations against aggressors 
with US. And blood shed by Chinese people during eight-­year war 
resistance cannot be measured. They finally achieved victory.
69. Wang said it always been their wish US would follow policy 
laid down by former President Roosevelt. And it not desire Chinese 
people that US should follow path former Japanese militarists and 
­German Nazis.
70. Wang said Chinese people have suffered tremendously under 
aggression imperialists very long time. But his people would never be 
forced into submission before any external power. This compares also 
with American people who did not submit before event forced on them 
by Pearl Harbor incident.
71. Wang said in view Taiwan is under occupation of US, they can­
not find better way illustrating this situation.
72. Wang said I had stated he had misunderstood my statements 
and that we should not confuse what I called two steps in settlement 
our disputes. He did not know how he had misunderstood.
