establishing the consolidated internal loan service (devised by Sir Francis in
consultation with the late Mr. Chow Tzu-chi) he recognized the authority of
those mandates, although, in doing so, he did not consult the foreign
Legations. In devoting to the consolidated internal loan service the millions
of customs revenue required therefor, Sir Francis not only did not ask the
consent of the Powers, but he flatly denied any weight to their arguments as
to the superior rights of senior foreign loans. Yet, when it has been a
question, since 1921, of petty allocations for the support of plague
prevention work, etc., the Chinese Government, apparently at his insistence,
has still asked the consent of the Powers, just as it did before 1921. In this
connection the Department’s attention is invited to the Note of the Chinese
Foreign Office dated July 14th, enclosed herewith,32 which states quite
frankly that the officiating Inspector-General replied to the request for funds
that “the consent must be obtained of the Foreign Ministers concerned.”
Sir Francis Aglen has undoubtedly met with great difficulty in conserving
the Customs revenue for the purpose of meeting the legal obligations of the
Chinese Government and for uses calculated to promote the Government’s
own real welfare. On a number of occasions the Chinese Government has
attempted to secure immediate use of funds allocated to the service of
internal loans under the terms of the Mandates of 1921. In these
circumstances Sir Francis has insisted that those terms be carried out and
that the Government keep faith with the bondholders. I understand that in
defence of the internal loan service he is guided by the belief that popular
support of the Government will be increased by widespread investment in
Government bonds. There can be no doubt that his announced support of
these bonds has been the essential factor inducing the Chinese public to
purchase them, and that he feels keenly his moral duty toward the
purchasers. In furtherance of his policy, he wishes to add more issues to the
bonds thus secured. This leads him to reject the claims of previously
concluded foreign loans, as presented by the Legations. He is thus brought
into conflict with the very Governments upon whose support he is entirely
dependent for his control over Customs funds, as given to him by the 1912
Bankers’ Agreement. (MacMurray’s China Treaties, page 946.) Adverting
once more to the Foreign Office Note of July 14, 1926, I have the honor to
state that I pointed out to my colleagues in an observation placed on the
circular what appeared to me to be an important principle involved in the
