230
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
for the transition period only. At the end of this period, there would be
further withdrawals to be worked out by the parties.
Three: What would be the Palestinian participation in the negotia-
tions and what rights would they have?
There are the inhabitants of the West Bank and Gaza. They would
not include Palestinians from outside unless by mutual agreement. On
the rights of the Palestinians: The document refers to “legitimate
rights” and says that any solution must recognize the legitimate rights
of the Palestinians and their just requirements. The Israelis fought this
hard but have now been willing to put this concept in a formal
document.
Four. How will the Palestinian problem be solved?
The document says it will be resolved in all its aspects, another
concept that Israel has consistently fought against. The document also
addresses the refugee problem not only for displaced persons but in a
broader refugee context.
Five. To whom do the principles of 242 apply?
The document says that 242 and its principles apply to all the
parties. The negotiations in Paragraph 1 are not only between Israel
and Jordan, but also on the final status of the Palestinians on the West
Bank and in relation to their neighbors. It states that 242 applies in all its
parts. There was big debate on this question because Israel knows what
“all its parts” means.
Six. How would the Palestinians determine their own future?
The answer to this is contained in Paragraph 1C providing for two
committees which would commence their work within three years and
complete it within five years. Israel wanted to start after four years with
no commitment to end it. This was a major step forward in our negotia-
tions at Camp David. It provides for negotiations to determine the final
status of the West Bank and Gaza and its relation to its neighbors. Para-
graph 1C also provides “negotiations for the resolution of other out-
standing issues by the end of five years.” Furthermore, the document
must be submitted to elected West Bank representatives for approval.
Seven. What is an elected representative?
The West Bank inhabitants would be free to elect a number of rep-
resentatives to govern the West Bank and Gaza during the transitional
period. Anyone can run for the election even a PLO inhabitant of the
West Bank and Gaza. This is another step for providing the participa-
tion of Palestinians.
The document also provides (assuming this is acceptable to Jor-
dan) for Palestinian participation in the work of the Jordanian/Israeli
treaty. While Jordan may not agree to this concept, we found that the
problem of the final status of the persons in Jordan and the West Bank,
