Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI for many legislators is the Persian Gulf. Here, we will hold some cases for your review and for completion of the policy review. —It will be almost six weeks before you make decisions on a new overall policy. By that time the backlog of cases could total $7 billion. If we wait to send these cases to Congress until your overall policy is set, the very magnitude of the submissions is likely to overshadow the new approach you will be enunciating. —Such a moratorium would, in general, create expectations about our future arms policy that cannot be met. We are not intending to forsake arms transfers as a part of our foreign policy. Whatever controls you do institute will not produce overnight results and will require cooperative efforts if they are to be effectively implemented. A moratorium of even a month will cause panic among those it affects and will tend to galvanize opposition before policy decisions have been made. —Bilateral political problems will result. Seven of these cases involve NATO countries. It is inconsistent for us to press NATO countries to do more on defense, while at the same time denying them items they have ordered. Both the Dutch and the British have made this point to us. With respect to other friendly countries, 33 of the 49 cases involve logistics support (without which equipment will be inoperable), annual ammunition procurement, and ancillary equipment for or small additions to stocks of weapons we have already agreed to provide. —Delay will mean price increases and production problems. The majority of current cases (23 of the 36 FMS cases) are not new and many have been pending since last November. Specific practical problems have already developed, or will soon develop, including: Delivery delays and price increases (for Israel and Greece) Logistic problems (for Iran, Taiwan, and Korea) Disruption of signed commercial contracts (10 of the 13 pending export license cases) Possible breaks in production lines. Pending Cases The growing list of pending cases (see Attachment 1)5 fall into several categories described below. I am recommending that you submit to
