Afghanistan 283 Vice President: We have poisoned the atmosphere for two years and our policy just isn’t working. Shouldn’t we review this with the goal of enhancing our chances through a broader cooperative relationship? They obviously cannot buckle under to us for political reasons. Brown: I agree. Vance: Do you want to ask for a repeal of the Symington and Glenn Amendments? Vice President: No. Let us concentrate on this issue. Aaron: We could try to get an international security waiver written into the Symington Amendment parallel to the one in the Glenn Amendment.6 Vice President: Let’s tell Congress that it is preferable to use Glenn’s formulation. That way at least we will have Glenn on our side. Brzezinski: How much time would that take however? Vice President: Perhaps now we could move very fast. Vance: I think you can go ahead faster by selling material to them outright and asking the Saudis to pay. Brown: In my experience you can get Congress to act faster than the Saudis. Vance: We could pursue both tracks. Brown: What kind of sales would that be? Vance: There are two ways. First we could sell them sophisticated equipment and just accept the fact that we are going to irritate the Indians. Secondly, we could give them a package related only to frontier defense. Brown: But what is the threat from Afghanistan? Vance: Agha-Shahi raised this repeatedly and asked what we would be willing to do. Brown: But they are worried about the Soviets and machine guns are not going to help them there. Vance: They are very worried about their tribal troubles. Brown: Are they really assuming that the Pathans will turn against them? Brzezinski: Isn’t the point one of generating more confidence in Pakistan so that they do not feel they are alone in a deteriorating situation? This means moving ahead on the non-proliferation issue. We should supply them arms. It doesn’t matter all that much what the arms are. We should talk to them about covert action to support the 6 See footnote 5, Document 99.
