3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–May 1977
31
If we began raising all these issues to the level of our state to state
relations then, obviously, there could be only one result: it could only
complicate all relations between our countries, lead us far from the so-
lution of issues which really can and must be the subject of interaction
and cooperation of our states. Besides, efforts to ensure the right of man
to live in a world free from war and the burden of the arms races under
conditions of security and friendly contacts among peoples would also
suffer.
Therefore we firmly adhere to the position that matters of internal
development, reflecting differences in ideology and socio-political
systems, should not be made a subject of dealings between states.
It is not accidental that it was that very principle, together with
other fundamental provisions, that was clearly started in the Basic Prin-
ciples of Relations between the USSR and the USA, signed in 1972.3 It is
relevant to recall also that as far back as the establishment of diplomatic
relations in 1933 our countries committed themselves to strictly respect
the undeniable right of each other to organize their lives as they wish
and refrain from interference in any way in the internal affairs of the
other side.
However, the statements and actions of the US side do not corre-
spond with that always or in all aspects. In effect the statements of
“concern” about human rights in the USSR amount to support and di-
rect incitement of individuals who oppose Soviet society. It is not that
the administration simply adopts a demonstratively approving atti-
tude toward some American correspondents in the Soviet Union who
do nothing but search out and publicize so-called “dissidents”. Some
members of the staff of the US Embassy in Moscow are also directly in-
volved in such activities. We could say specifically who they are.
And when the Soviet authorities resort to the measures which are a
prerogative of any state when Soviet citizens violate laws, this is used
actively by the US side to the detriment of the relations between our
countries.
Besides, it is known that the representatives of the US Embassy in
Moscow meet secretly with Sakharov who possesses state secrets af-
fecting the defense of our country. The most recent of these meetings
was held on February 8 at the initiative of the Embassy. This is an out-
rageous fact and no reference to “human rights” will conceal that here
we are dealing with direct activity of US special services against the
USSR and the Soviet social system.
As far as references to the American public opinion, the mood in
Congress etc. are concerned, there is public opinion in the USSR too
3 See footnote 3, Document 4.
