646 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement General Twining then completed his report on the Congressional hearings by describing the question on the subject of the missile gap. When asked how to remedy the missile gap, he had answered that we should merely produce lots of big ATLAS missiles. However, he does not advocate this: The ATLAS is not the weapon that we would ultimately like, and, therefore, large quantities of this weapon would be obsolete soon. He does not believe the USSR is in a mood for general war, par­ ticularly in view of the pride that they take in having rebuilt their cities from World War II. He repeated the desires on the part of fearful people, stating that if we bought everything they advocated we would wind up spending $70 billion for defense alone. Finally, he had suggested to the Congress that they employ the word “operational” when discussing missile sites. He pointed out that there is no glamor to the subject of base building, only to the production of missiles. The President suggested we might mention to the Congress that every missile site near a city makes that city a prime target. General Twining now reiterated his admira­ tion for the performance of the Secretary of Defense before these hear­ ings. In this connection, the President expressed the view that Secretary McElroy, while he should not be made to look too partisan, possesses talents which are such that he should not be lost to Government service when this particular job is terminated. * * * As a matter of interest, General Twining then mentioned the atti­ tude of the Congress relative to jurisdiction, which had caused consid­ erable disturbance for a couple of days during the hearings. Primarily, Congress fears that the Executive is taking over prerogatives which are provided theoretically by the Constitution to them. In particular, the prerogative of raising and maintaining “armies.” The main problem is that of personnel strengths of the Army, the Marines, and the Reserve components. In the course of these discussions, General Twining mentioned that the Secretary of Defense had been grilled extensively. Finally, he had stated flatly that he did not pretend to be a lawyer, but that whatever the President had done in this matter he concurred in and thought it was right. Although the President had not been aware that the prerogatives question had been a major issue recently, he was quite familiar with the pattern. The Army, Marines, and Reserve com­ ponents would be, in his view, the only logical areas in which the pol­ iticians would be concerned, primarily because these are the areas in which the Administration is cutting back. When an installation is cut out it does injury to some locality. This resulted in some discussion of the motives of individ­ ual Congressmen, particularly in the matter of interfering with Administration plans for projected force structures. In this connection, General Twining mentioned that Representative Arends had come and
