502 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement prominent family in the Dominican Republic. Although these arrests had broken up the plotting against Trujillo, they had at the same time weakened the dictator’s position. Mr. Dulles thought that further attempts would be made to kill or oust Trujillo. Relations between the government and the church were rapidly deteriorating. Mr. Dulles pointed out incidentally that the attitude of the church in the Dominican Republic was quite different from the attitude of the church in Cuba. The economic situation in the Dominican Republic was worsening. Business is stagnant and international financial sources are drying up. The government has resorted to various subterfuges in an attempt to improve its precarious financial position. Secretary Gates3 asked whether it was true that Trujillo was one of the richest men in the world, with more money than the Dominican government. Mr. Dulles said this statement was true; Trujillo was reported to have milked the Dominican Republic of $400 million, an estimate which was probably exaggerated and should be scaled down by one-­half or two-­thirds. Secretary Anderson said he understood that $44 million in gold had been recently removed from Now York banks by the Dominican Republic and had been placed in the Bank of Nova Scotia. Mr. Dulles said he had a detailed report on the financial situation of the Dominican Republic, all the details of which he would not read. However, it appeared that the Dominican Republic now held $15 ­million in gold and that it had incurred a variety of obligations; for example, a $16.5 million loan from the Bank of Nova Scotia secured by the sugar crop. The Dominican Republic had also drawn $7 ­million out of a $11.5 ­million credit with the International Monetary Fund. Secretary Anderson said the International Monetary Fund’s dealings with the Dominican Republic might present a problem to the U.S. The Dominican Republic now had drawn so much from the Fund that it could only draw in the future $2 million every 90 days without consulting the Directors of the Fund. If the Dominicans should want to draw more than $2 ­million every 90 days, the question would arise as to how the U.S. Director should vote when the Dominican Republic undertakes the necessary consultation with the Fund. Mr. Dulles continuing his briefing, reported that Trujillo, apparently not realizing his position, is not anticipating an early fall from power and is apparently not planning flight. The Dominican military forces have apparently been repelled by the excesses in Cuba and may believe they will be compelled to act against Trujillo before the radical pro-Castro elements, which are daily increasing in strength, take over the government. If there is a gap between the departure of Trujillo and the establishment of the new regime, the radical pro-Castro elements might have an opportunity to seize power. If the army does not hold off these radical elements, a period of chaos might ensue. Mr. Dulles believed that Trujillo’s 3 Thomas S. Gates, Jr., Secretary of Defense.
