1254  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
paragraph 2 which was designed to give time to State to consult infor­
mally with Hammarskjold, who is now in the Soviet Union for a few 
days, before having too precise a statement on a method of selection of 
scientists being made. This amendment of State was a completely firm 
position of that agency, since State considered that it had full responsi­
bility for the method of working out the details of selection of scientists 
vis-­a-­vis the UN.
Mr. Washburn raised the point that Press Secretary Hagerty would 
certainly want to indicate the percentage of reduction in radio­active 
fallout that the pending test would show. He stated that the whole 
purpose and origin of the exercise had been to support the President’s 
press statements on July 3 and that the elimination of the figure of 90% 
or better would not do this and if it were not possible to achieve such 
a figure in the test, the backfire from world opinion would be too great 
to justify having it.
Admiral Foster talked with Admiral Strauss and with a technical 
expert in the AEC. They affirmed doubts as to whether the percentage 
figure could be guaranteed in the particular test in view of complicated 
factors from ground radiation and said that while it was hoped this 
could be done, they felt it unwise to include a precise percentage figure. 
Admiral Strauss added further, as a clincher for continuing with the 
test shot, that he considered the President had made a definite decision 
to go ahead with the test and that the AEC did not wish the percentage 
figure in the draft.
The sentence included in the composite draft agreed last Saturday 
was inserted in the AEC draft as the second sentence of paragraph 5. 
There were other editorial changes which can be noted in the annotated 
draft attached.
One problem raised in the third sentence of paragraph 5 deserves 
attention, where the phrase “basic international differences are settled 
and…” was inserted by the AEC into a sentence contained in the earlier 
composite draft. AEC insisted that it remain, and, while State had no strong 
feelings, it concurred with the others that this gave too broad a scope to 
the context of this concurete announcement, which is simply devoted to 
nuclear testing. Further, the query was raised whether or not the inclu­
sion of this statement would not give rise to widespread criticism that 
the U.S. was tending to raise a whole series of unspecified, international 
differences which had to be settled prior to any action in the nuclear test­
ing field. Defense suggested a possible alternative which would have the 
sentence read, “Until basic international differences are settled enabling a 
safeguarded…” I would personally suggest deletion and would suggest 
that you may wish to try to obtain appropriate assent to its deletion.
It was agreed by all except USIA that in view of the situation 
described and by AEC standing on its basic text and the fact that the 
test will not be deferred, that there should not be a question and answer
