3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
190
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
continue to observe the terms of the Interim Agreement, which might
be issued simultaneously in Moscow and Washington. Dobrynin raised
some question initially about the Interim Agreement announcement,
fearing that it would convey a sense of fatalism about the September
meeting, but after discussion and reflection, expressed willingness to
convey the draft to Moscow for consideration. The Secretary asked Do-
brynin to convey to Gromyko his strong feeling that it would be useful
to say something now about the Interim Agreement, to ward off nega-
tive interpretations of the postponement. It was agreed that, subject to
Soviet concurrence, the press statement would be released Thursday,
September 1, at noon Washington time, 7 p.m. Moscow time.7
It was further agreed that the two Foreign Ministers would meet
on September 22, and that Gromyko’s meeting with the President
would follow on the 23rd.
Dobrynin said he would seek a response from Moscow as soon as
possible on the proposal for postponement and the press statement.
There followed a brief review of selected SALT issues. In the
course of a summation of his impression of the US position, Dobrynin
made it clear that he had not clearly understood some figures men-
tioned by Brzezinski at their last meeting. The point at issue appeared
to be that if the ALCMed bombers were to be counted under the MIRV
aggregate, as the Soviet Union now wished, the US would in practice
be limited to a SNDV aggregate of 2080, while the Soviet Union would
have an aggregate of 2250. Dobrynin asked if it were the US intention to
propose that the Soviet Union reduce its aggregate to 2080. Warnke
said that he would supply Dobrynin with a paper clarifying the point.
Dobrynin restated the Soviet preference for including limitations
on air-to-surface missiles in the treaty rather than in the protocol, and
also the Soviet position that a reduction in the MIRV aggregate without
the inclusion of ALCMed bombers would have the practical effect of
giving the US a MIRV advantage.
7 No press statement was found.
