934  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
would also be useable by indigenous carriers in at least some of the 
underdeveloped countries. Such aircraft would thus contribute to the 
implementation of the policy that, as a means of promoting the Free 
World aviation position in the underdeveloped areas and of neutral­
izing further Sino-­Soviet aviation encroachments in such areas, the 
United States should encourage the development in the United States 
and other Free World nations of competitive types of aircraft and avia­
tion equipment suitable for use in underdeveloped areas.7
OBJECTIVE
15. A civil air cargo capacity which, together with the military air 
cargo fleet, is adequate (in quantity and quality), and immediately avail­
able, to meet military and mobilization requirements in time of war, 
national emergency, or whenever a military situation requires.
POLICY GUIDANCE
16. a. In the implementation of existing policy which requires that 
the government divest itself of those activities competitive with pri­
vate industry, divert progressively and in an orderly manner increasing 
quantities of non-­hard-­core Federal cargo airlift traffic from the military 
cargo fleet to certificated U.S. air carriers8 [as civil aircraft, of modern 
types (e.g., the DC–7F and the L–1049H), become available and can pro­
vide civil air cargo capability at reasonable cost9].10 In negotiating con­
tracts for the carriage of MATS non-­hard-­core cargo by civil air carriers, 
give preference [to the extent feasible]11 [wherever possible]12 to those 
certificated U.S. carriers which demonstrate a willingness and ability to 
acquire uncompromised cargo aircraft.
b. As civil air carriers equip themselves with uncompromised 
cargo aircraft, increase the use of such carriers for non-­hard-­core traffic.
c. Adjust the operations and capability of MATS toward meeting 
only its wartime “hard-­core” mission in accordance with a and b above. 
However, at all times:
7 See paragraph 31, NSC 5726/1, “U.S. Civil Aviation Policy Toward the Sino-­Soviet 
Bloc”. [Footnote is in the original.]
8 A certificated air carrier is an air carrier holding an effective certificate issued by 
the Civil Aeronautics Board authorizing it to engage in air transportation. [Footnote is in 
the original.]
9 The Department of Defense has stated that its criteria for determining comparative 
costs are on the basis of Bureau of the Budget Bulletin 60–2, September 21, 1959. [Footnote 
is in the original.]
10 Budget proposes deletion. [Brackets and footnote are in the original.]
11 Defense-­JCS proposal. [Brackets and footnote are in the original.]
12 Treasury, Commerce, Budget, FAA proposal. [Brackets and footnote are in the 
original.]
