60
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
i. To enhance and deepen our collaboration with our friends in the
industrial world—countries which share our values, have political
systems similar to ours, and which because of their wealth have a spe-
cial burden of responsibility to the rest of mankind.
ii. This cooperation should focus not only on improving prospects
in the industrial world but on making it more possible for the new
emerging states to enhance, through self-reliance, their own internal
progress.
iii. In the foregoing context, we shall seek cooperation on the
global problems with the communist countries, while striving to re-
duce areas of conflict and to codify more precise rules of reciprocal re-
straint—notably through strategic arms limitations and reductions and
through agreements on regional restraints.
This speech would initiate a new phase in U.S. foreign policy,
going beyond the Atlanticist/East-West Cold War framework of the
years 1945–1976. The regional and functional recommendations that
follow are designed to set such a foreign policy in motion.
[Omitted here are Part Two: Relations with Advanced Industrial
Economies; Part Three: East-West Relations; Part Four: Relations with
Developing Countries; Part Five: The Middle East; Part Six: Defense;
Part Seven: Arms Control; Part Eight: Foreign Economic Policy;
Part Nine: International Development; and Part Ten: Multilateral
Organizations.]
14.
Editorial Note
Secretary of State-designate Cyrus R. Vance testified on January
11, 1977, before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, which was
holding an open hearing in order to consider Vance’s nomination. The
previous afternoon, Vance had attended a closed, “get-acquainted” in-
formal meeting with Committee members. Senator John Sparkman
(D-Alabama) chaired the January 11 hearing and began the pro-
ceedings by summarizing Vance’s professional career. He then called
on Senators Jacob Javits (R-New York) and Daniel Patrick Moynihan
(D-New York) to offer statements in support of the Vance nomination.
Following their statements, Sparkman directed Senator Frank Church
(D-Idaho) to question Vance. Church stated:
“Mr. Vance, we have just come through an election campaign in
which there was a lively debate on foreign policy matters. I think as a
result of the election there is the expectation that the new President will
be initiating changes in American foreign policy.
