750 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 calm public frustration. Thus, we should avoid the public expectation that there will be new or dramatic initiatives every week or so. A reduced level of rhetoric is important for three reasons: —The greater are the public expectations that pressures will lead to a solution in the near future, the greater the frustration and impression of U.S. weakness when they don’t. Rather than continuing the cycle by meeting a new wave of frustration with new measures, it is better to begin to prepare the public for a lingering problem. The less the public frustration, the wider are our options and the less likely we will be driven to action which does not serve our interests. —The more we play up the hostages as a public issue, the more the militants are likely to conclude that we will make new concessions and the more the militants will want to keep the limelight by keeping the hostages. —With regard to our Allies’ actions, our public position should underscore the serious hardships and isolation of Iran implied in the sanctions; it is more valuable in Iran and here to play up what the Allies do, rather than down play their actions. This is not to imply that we should take a soft line on Iran. Indeed, a less public line should be shaped to convey menace rather than compromise. But we should avoid promising our public more than we can deliver, thus also building up the militants in Iran. Our public theme should emphasize the following points: —Sanctions have been applied and it is necessary to allow time for full effects to be felt in Iran. —The effects on Iran will increase as the European sanctions are implemented. —Iran is in conflict with the entire civilized world, not just the United States. —We are consulting with our allies and friends about further steps they might take. —Iran has an obligation to the world to improve the condition of the hostages and to report regularly to the families. (We should consider family visits as a means of increasing this form of pressure on Iran.) Where there are diplomatic developments reported in the press, we should not build these up but portray them as part of our ongoing efforts. We should avoid threats or discussion of military force, except perhaps on background. Initiatives During the Next Two Weeks Through May 10 During this period we should attempt to lay out a general scheme for concerted activities by our key collaborators and get their agreement to this plan of action. This would mean:
