1408  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
The Defense representative, General Byers, appeared to agree, 
during the course of the meeting, to present both State and Defense 
drafts to the Joint Chiefs formally so that work could be started in the 
Joint Staff on the JCS views.
The Group discussed the extraordinary complexity of attempt­
ing to deal with the question of “peaceful uses” of nuclear dynamite. 
Dr. Killian’s representative called attention to the fact that the atomic 
exhibit to be opened in Geneva this summer would include a section 
on the peaceful uses of atomic energy. He restated the Geneva scien­
tists view that an effort to distinguish between peaceful explosions and 
weapons tests had not been discussed, and would be practically impos­
sible to accomplish under any kind of a monitoring system.
The discussion also made clear that the system being devised in 
Geneva will not work if stations are not established in Communist 
China. If other states will not accept monitoring stations in their terri­
tory, the number of stations in the USSR and in the U.S. will have to be 
greatly increased if the system is to have a significant capability.
As far as I could learn, the State Department has not attempted to 
list the policy issues involved in a decision to modify existing policy on 
nuclear testing. There was some feeling expressed by the State repre­
sentative that Dr. Killian’s points, as summarized during Wednesday’s 
meeting, were so broad as to involve issues which need not be decided 
immediately.
Bromley Smith
353.	 Telegram Denuc 163 From Geneva1
Geneva, August 14, 1958, 10 p.m.
Denuc 163. At further three-­hour informal session today, para-­
by-­para review of WestDel and SovDel draft conclusions continued 
and there appeared to be further meeting of minds on most signifi­
cant points other than number of posts, discussion of which Fedorov 
obviously postponing until last. Exact degree agreement achieved dif­
ficult determine until redrafts based on today’s session prepared and 
exchanged. At end session, Fedorov gave Fisk redraft organization 
1 Source: Report of meeting with Soviets in Geneva on detection of nuclear explo­
sions. Confidential. 1 p. NARA, RG 59, Central Files, 700.5611/8–1458.
