690  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
subservience that it imposes on Guatemalan governments), as mini-
mum interest rates and the transfer to Guatemalans of major authority 
for the administration of such aid.
Our inability to go along with such an approach had made 
Ydígoras susceptible to the intrigues and murmurs of a weird assort-
ment of [text not declassified] counselors who include (for different rea-
sons and with varying motives) the Gonzalez Siguí brothers, Roberto 
Alejos, the Colombian Luis Morales Gomez, Jorge Garcia Granados 
and the American Felix McBride, of Washington.
Ydígoras’ recent actions suggest that, since loans he had hoped 
to obtain from such sources as DLF and the Eximbank are likely to 
be subject to what he considers high interest rates, he has been led to 
believe that he can do as well on the private money market and there-
fore is testing it, in the hope that simultaneously he can demonstrate 
his credit abroad, raise hopes for settling the country’s economic prob-
lems, and flaunt his independence of the United States Government. 
Nevertheless, the cold reception given to one Ydígoras emissary 
(Alejos),5 the colder one due another (Morales Gomez) and possibly 
to a third (a Venezuelan, Carlos otto) raise the probability that their 
failure to satisfy Ydígoras desires will be attributed, not to their own 
shortcomings, but to Departmental intrigue.
Ydígoras is rumored to have said that he will do anything to pre-
vent the Department from handling him “as it did Arbenz”. He is quite 
capable, if led to believe that such a fate is imminent, of turning over the 
Government to the forces he believes would give us the hardest time 
in Guatemala. One group that seems to be candidate for succession in 
such an event (and would no doubt the characterization of “difficult” 
from our point of view) includes the Gonzalez Sigui brothers6 and the 
Arevalista (to put it mildly) Col. Carlos Paz Tejada. However, he does 
not seem to have made up his mind definitely to throw the game to 
the nationalists and/or leftists. While toying with the idea, he also is 
assuming anti-Communist postures, as in calling ODECA Ministers of 
Government together to discuss the communist problem and in (pre-
sumably) inspiring Consul General Urrutia’s warning to the Wall St. Journal 
on June 3 that, if the pro-Communist left wins the November congressional 
elections and subsequently the presidential elections, it will all be our fault.
Ydígoras is volatile and if ways could be found to support tangibly 
our assurances that his advisors are wrong in claiming the Department 
seeks his downfall, it might well be possible to work fairly peacefully 
5 See the memorandum of conversation by King, March 25, Document GT-16.
6 Carlos González Siguí, Private Secretary to the President of Guatemala; and Col. 
José Rubén González Siguí, Guatemalan Minister of National Defense.
