Non-Proliferation
863
tion,3 which required us either to give or refuse consent to an activity
that we were not permitting in the U.S. In spite of this provision, presi-
dential statement showed U.S. cognizance of Japanese energy needs.
The small quantities of uranium recycled through Tokai would be in-
significant relative to total Japanese energy requirements.
5. Nye reassured Japanese Del that U.S. viewed Japan as a major
economic power and had no desire to restrict their energy needs. He ex-
plained Japanese role in INFCEP would be without prejudice to solu-
tion on Tokai issue.
6. Thorne (ERDA) explained budget steps being taken to imple-
ment U.S. non-proliferation objectives. A comprehensive program
involving 750 million dollars with Fall 1978 target date identifies nu-
clear power options and alternatives with lower proliferation risks.
Studies would include assessment of uranium and thorium reserves
availability.
7. Japanese showed concern that INFCEP would a priori exclude
reprocessing and prejudge conclusion of studies. A study over 3 or 4
years that did not produce an acceptable solution would place Japan in
a difficult position. Nye acknowledged U.S. intent to include evalu-
ation of reprocessing and that U.S. does not prejudge study outcomes.
Japanese replied that economic and environmental aspects of repro-
cessing were domestic problems and that they were fairly certain that
reprocessing could be safeguarded.
8. When asked, Kobayashi replied that Japan could go along with
U.S. on Article 14 (sanctions). They were reluctant to make Article 9 (re
consent to reprocessing) mandatory but would not block consensus on
this. On Article 4 (full scope safeguards), they stated that requirement
to meet safeguards duration requirements of GOV 16214 caused some
problems when exporting small parts for countries already possessing
reactors.
9. Nye provided explanation of presidential decision to issue
MB–10s5 on a case-by-case basis based on demonstrated need, for ex-
ample congested storage at reactor sites. Yamamoto subsequently
called U.S. Del’s attention to the requirement for Japanese utilities to
make a five percent deposit by the end of August in order to confirm
contract to be negotiated by end of May for reprocessing in UK and
3 Reference is to the 1968 Japan-U.S. Nuclear Cooperation Agreement which re-
quired Japan to obtain advance approval from the U.S. Government for any international
transfer of nuclear material of U.S. origin.
4 Reference is to IAEA document GOV/1621.
5 The Presidential Decision was not found. MB–10 refers to applications that na-
tions must submit in order to obtain shipment-by-shipment approvals from the U.S. Gov-
ernment prior to transporting spent nuclear fuel to overseas reprocessors.
