888 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV PD–59, the nuclear weapons employment policy directive, completes the series.12 It is, to some extent, an addition to NSDM–242,13 the first effort at “limited” nuclear options taken in 1974 by Nixon and Schlesinger. I want to spell out for you in some detail the differences between the two directives, however, because there are claims already being made that PD–59 is nothing new, just a rehash of NSDM–242. (C) a. [8 lines not declassified] b. NSDM–242 put most emphasis on targeting postwar recovery resources, i.e. cities and industry. PD–59 retains this insofar as it retains the SIOP. For all other targeting, and even within the SIOP after economic recovery targets are hit, PD–59 puts the targeting emphasis on these categories: all military, C3I, and war-­supporting industry. (C) c. NSDM–242 treated C3I as needed to transmit “emergency action messages” to our forces, to chat with Moscow via MOLINK, and for diplomacy with other states. PD–59 calls for C3I of a much more flexible and extensive kind: (1) control of both nuclear and general purpose forces operations and (2) a “look-­shoot-­look” capability to locate new and moving targets rapidly through a prolonged conflict. (C) d. [6 lines not declassified] e. NSDM–242 said nothing about “acquisition policy,” only “employment policy.” Programmatically, therefore, NSDM–242 remained a dead letter. PD–59 ties acquisition to employment policy. That means that OMB, Defense, and the DCI must take the new policy into account in their budgets and programs. (C) NSDM–242 kept the old theoretical baggage, trying to make a limited “retaliatory” or even a first use strike more credible as the SIOP became less credible. Could the U.S. public sit calmly through such LNOs, having not even civil defense protection? NSDM–242 was a misconceived document. It merely exaggerated the flaws of the SIOP. PD–59 is fundamentally different, while not designed to be a “war fighting” doctrine, it takes into account Soviet employment doctrine because, with the Soviet acquisition of such large and accurate forces, that doctrine cannot be ignored if deterrence is to be maintained. To fail to make this change would be to risk drifting into a situation where our doctrine and capabilities could, in a crisis, deter ourselves more than the Soviets. (C) 12 Carter underlined “PD–59” and “nuclear weapons employment policy” in this sentence. 13 See footnote 2, Document 29.
