German Democratic Republic —Critical intellectuals increasingly turned to the West to publish their works or to make known their views, many of which called for fundamental changes in the GDR. —The Evangelical Church, immediately after receiving unprecedented concessions from the state, launched an offensive against the regime’s plans to introduce military training in the high schools. And the SED seemed generally unable to break through a growing malaise typified by apolitical youth, apathetic workers, and petty corruption and crime. (C) The main catalyst in this process was the intensified coverage of East Germany from within by FRG media, especially West German TV, which reaches 80 percent of the GDR. With West German reporters focusing on negative developments, grumbling citizens and outspoken intellectuals/artists soon found a public forum for their discordant views. This FRG media penetration, compounded by 10 million annual West German visitors, negated Honecker’s goal of a systematic delimitation between the two social/cultural systems—his much-vaunted policy of Abgrenzung. (C) These problems did not pose an immediate threat to the political system or Honecker’s personal position. But looking a few years ahead, Honecker must have heeded the gloomy projections on the economic front and the political danger they entailed. The GDR’s bleak economic outlook—mounting balance of payments deficits with both Moscow and the West and a likely unwillingness by the Soviets to continue their heavy subsidization of the GDR—pointed to the need to cut back on imports, boost exports, and reduce consumption growth. At the same time, the regime would have to come to grips with low prices for retail goods which encourage the population to consume. Honecker realized that the position of the East German consumer, while remaining high by East European standards, inevitably would suffer. (C) In this context, restiveness could be expected to grow, stimulated by the almost daily barrage of negative TV coverage by the FRG. Thus, the relative stability that the regime “bought” in the mid-1970s threatened to dissipate by the early 1980s. Honecker and the SED decided on a preemptive strike before matters got worse. The Clampdown: Early Signals (C) Honecker signaled the possibility of a tougher domestic line in June 1978 when the SED revised Walter Ulbricht’s status from that of non-person to “great proletarian revolutionary.” Ulbricht, the “father” of the GDR, was a firm Stalinist who pushed East German political institutionalization and economic modernization with fervor. His tendency, toward the end of his career, to stress the superiority of German socialism irritated Moscow. When he objected to Soviet detente overtures to Bonn and to the West in general, he was removed from office.
