1242  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
principle, it never did so. On the contrary, until December 19, 1958, 
the Government repeatedly reaffirmed the 50–50 principle. Relying 
on such assurances, the petroleum industry has invested in Venezuela 
vast sums of money.
Therefore, under the “equal sharing principle”, government and 
industry have shared profits from the industry on the basis that royal-
ties plus income and other incidental taxes would give the Venezuelan 
Government 50 percent of the concessionaire’s profits. In other words, 
if a petroleum concessionaire, after paying royalty and taxes, as afore-
said, had a profit which exceeded government “take”, the excess profit 
was to be divided on a 50–50 basis between government and the respec-
tive concessionaires.
2. Pre-December 1958 Tax System
In Venezuela the oil industry has been subject to three different 
taxes on income. The first two are general provisions applicable to 
all personal and corporate incomes, and the third is a special provi-
sion covering the extractive industries. Until the December 20, 1958, 
tax decree, the oil companies tax bills were made up in the following 
manner.
(a) The Basic or Normal Tax
This is a 2½ percent assessment on net income derived from normal 
industry operations such as production, transportation or refining. Net 
taxable income is calculated by deducting from gross income the usual 
charges of doing business, similar to those in the U.S. Depreciation and 
depletion are allowed, but depletion is limited to a return of cost rather 
than as a percentage of total production income as in the U.S. Losses are 
deductible much on the same basis as in the U.S. and a carry-­forward of 
losses for the purpose of this tax is permitted for two years.
(b) The Supplementary Tax (Surtax)
This was levied at progressive rates commencing with 1.5 per-
cent on net taxable income up to Bolivars 10,000 ($3,236) reaching a 
maximum of 26.0 percent on amounts in excess of Bs. 28,000,000 ($9.06 
million). In some cases a reduction in the supplementary tax rate was 
granted for new investment in increased production facilities.
(c) The Additional Tax (50–50 Provision)
Under this provision of law, a levy of 50 percent was assessed on 
the amount by which a company’s net income after deduction of taxes 
(royalties - a minimum 16-2/3 percent under the Petroleum Law - are 
included as taxes paid) exceeds total taxes paid. This classical exam-
ple of the 50–50 principle applied only to companies whose net income 
for the tax year was 15 percent or more of the capital invested in the 
production of that income. For companies whose net income was 
more than 10 percent but less than 15 percent of capital invested, the
