National Security Policy  171
in response to an attack on them of such proportions as to threaten their 
national survival, since its implementation could only result in mutual 
destruction.
c. Nuclear Weapons Policy. Because of mutual deterrence and the 
dangers of limited conflicts broadening into general war, the United 
States can no longer base its national policy on placing main reliance on 
atomic weapons for situations short of general war. In such situations 
the United States must maintain forces capable of reacting to aggression 
with either nuclear or non-­nuclear means in the most effective manner 
to achieve U.S. national objectives while at the same time minimizing 
the risk of general war.
d. Limited War. It is important that our policy recognize that lim­
ited aggression is essentially any war in which neither the national sur­
vival of the United States nor that of the USSR is at stake, that it may 
include direct conflict between U.S. and Soviet forces, and that it may 
be intense and of significant duration. The objective may require a mil­
itary victory, in the traditional sense, or some lesser solution which is 
to our net advantage. Since limited aggression is increasingly the more 
probable form of conflict which we must face, national policy should 
put increasing emphasis on suitable ready forces with a flexible combat 
capability and provided with transportation which insures their strate­
gic mobility.
5. It is recommended that the four objectives outlined above, 
together with the implementing textual changes in NSC 5810 which are 
attached as the Annex hereto, form the basis of your position on Basic 
National Security Policy.
Annex to Appendix A
RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE CHIEFS OF STAFF, U.S. ARMY, THE 
CHIEF OF NAVAL OPERATIONS, AND THE COMMANDANT OF 
THE MARINE CORPS
on
BASIC NATIONAL SECURITY POLICY
(Changes indicated in the usual manner)
1. Page 2, paragraph 5, second sentence—Change to read: “5 . . . . (b) 
in a time of relative nuclear parity and increased Soviet political and 
economic aggressiveness, to place greater emphasis on non-military 
political and economic measures and on the military capability to support 
these measures and to deal with limited Communist aggression.”
REASON: Relative nuclear parity increases the likelihood of lim­
ited aggression and requires a military capability to deal with it and to 
support more active U.S. political and economic policies.
2. Page 3, paragraph 6—Insert as subparagraph 6b and reletter sub­
sequent subparagraphs:
b. To apply pressures actively against the Sino-Soviet Bloc whenever and 
wherever possible in order to disrupt Communist designs for expansion and
