Sources Sources for Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI The files at the Jimmy Carter Presidential Library in Atlanta, Georgia, are the single most important source of documentation for those interested in arms control during the Carter administration. Foreign policy research in the Carter Presidential Library centers around two collections: National Security Affairs (NSA), Brezezinski Material, and the NSA, Staff Material. The lot file containing the records of Secretary of State Cyrus Vance is a rich repository of key memoranda of conversation between Vance and the leading political figures involved in arms control discussions. The records of Deputy Secretary of State Warren Christopher (much of which was already declassified at the time of research) proved important particularly when he was serving as Acting Secretary of State. The lot file containing the records of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency were particularly helpful. Finally, the papers of Secretary of Defense Harold Brown at the Library of Congress document the enormous influence exerted by a relatively unknown cabinet official during the Carter administration. The editor also had access to records at the National Security Council, the Central Intelligence Agency, and the Department of Defense. The editor made considerable use of materials already compiled for other volumes in the Foreign Relations series, including those of the Soviet Union; China; Japan, Korea; Mexico, Cuba, and the Caribbean; South America; SALT II; and Western Europe. Readers interested in these subjects should consult the relevant volumes for further information on the specific sources used in research. The following list identifies the particular files and collections used in the preparation of this volume. The declassification and transfer to the National Archives of the Department of State records is in process, and some of these records are already available for public review at the National Archives. In addition to the paper files cited below, a growing number of documents are available on the Internet. The Office of the Historian maintains a list of these Internet resources on its website and encourages readers to consult that site on a regular basis. XV
