Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks 101 agreement each signatory’s right to defend itself as recognized in Article 51 of the UN Charter. (TS) ASAT Test Suspension. All reaffirmed their commitment to a oneyear, all-altitude, orbital interceptor test suspension as part of an Initial ASAT Agreement. (S) Relation to SALT TWO. All agreed that being able to verify compliance with the SALT TWO agreement is not dependent on our reaching an ASAT agreement with the Soviets. However, it was recognized that such an agreement could provide additional reassurance, and therefore might complement the SALT ratification process. The chairman noted that the majority had reached agreement on the issues, and suggested that we consider finalizing an Initial ASAT Agreement with the Soviets prior to the US/Soviet SALT summit, provided we can do so without compromising our basic objectives. (TS) 44. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1 Washington, March 20, 1979 SUBJECT ASAT (U) As you may recall, in the second round of ASAT talks in Bern2 the Soviets argued that our bilateral agreement should not provide protection for (1) satellites performing “illegal” acts, and (2) satellites of 3rd countries. (S) The SCC has been studying these issues since the talks adjourned, and met March 12 to discuss possible ways to resolve them (Summary of Conclusions at Tab A).3 The SCC agreed to approach the first issue by offering to recognize in the Treaty both parties’ inherent right of self defense as stated in the U.N. Charter. At the same time we do this we would note the statements made by the Soviets in both rounds of ASAT talks that their concerns with “illegal” satellites are not a pretext for retaining ASAT capabilities. This should resolve the issue if the Soviets’ 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 102, SCC 148, ASAT, 3/12/79. Top Secret. Sent for action. 2 See Document 41. 3 See Document 43.
