38 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX tinian question based on the Aswan Formula announced by President Carter at Aswan, Egypt in January 1978.3 2. The second achievement, to be won through hard bargaining, would be a precisely written secret agreement on the framework for a Middle East peace settlement. This secret agreement would be signed by both President Sadat and Israeli Prime Minister Menachim Begin with a witnessing signature by President Carter. The reason President Sadat would insist on a written document witnessed by President Carter is to prevent subsequent statements by the two parties—either inadvertently or deliberately—misinterpreting the understanding reached between the leaders of Egypt and Israel. 3. In defining what he meant by a precise agreement on the framework for a Middle East peace, President Sadat stated that both he and Prime Minister Begin had to agree on a clear definition of all the major aspects of a Middle East settlement. Following the acceptance of this major, overall framework of agreement, details would then be worked out by committees, hopefully to include the participation of other Arab nations also. 4. President Sadat’s own basic tenet for a framework of an agreement allows for considerable flexibility on details, but no compromise on sovereignty or territory—except for minor adjustments on the West Bank. 5. President Sadat proposed the Palestinian question as one example of the need for both a public and a secret agreement. Whereas the public statement could announce an agreement on the Aswan Formula as a basis for the Palestinian issue, secret negotiations would need to address Israeli concerns regarding which Palestinians would be the future leaders of a Palestinian West Bank. 6. President Sadat stated that President Carter’s participation is essential because he (President Sadat) has lost the trust and confidence which he had in Prime Minister Begin, and now he must fall back on his trust in President Carter’s sincerity and fairness. President Sadat felt that if he and Prime Minister Begin reached a precise written understanding and if President Carter witnessed that written understanding, then the peace process could indeed take a major step forward. 3 See Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. VIII, Arab-Israeli Dispute, January 1977– August 1978, footnote 4, Document 187.
