1977 163 (TS) Although successive Secretaries of Defense and Presidents were familiar in general with NSTAP planning objectives and the SIOP, their statements about US policy for buying nuclear weapons frequently suggested nuclear employment doctrine and strategies that differed from the actual attacks planned in the SIOP. Strategic force sizing criteria of that era were predicated on the assumption that deterrence could be assured by threatening to destroy in retaliation about one-­third of the Soviet population and 70 percent of the war-­supporting economic base. Secretaries of Defense, though mentioning damage limitation as a US strategic forces objective, tended to imply that population and industry were the prime targets for “assured destruction” in retaliation to a Soviet nuclear attack against the United States. However, because forces to carry out the assured destruction policy were well hedged to cover a worst-­case condition, weapons became available for targeting a comprehensive military target system. The actual employment plan (SIOP) continued to place the major weight of effort on enemy military forces to limit damage to the US and its allies, and to assist in the destruction of the enemy’s over-­all military capability. III. Nuclear Weapons Employment Policy Reassessment (1969–74) (U) Overwhelming US nuclear superiority and the threat of large-­ scale nuclear retaliation provided a credible deterrent not only to deliberate nuclear attack throughout the 1950s and into the 1960s but also a reasonably plausible threat for response to conventional attacks. US nuclear capability continued to increase during this period with significant qualitative and quantitative improvements in US nuclear forces. Although concerns for the survivability of the US forces date back to discussion of the vulnerability of bomber bases in the late 1950s, the deployment of submarine-­launched ballistic missiles, silo-­based ICBMs on constant alert, as well as an alert posture for SAC bombers greatly enhanced the survivability of the US retaliatory capability. An effective US second-­strike retaliatory capability appeared secure even after having sustained a major surprise attack by the Soviet Union, and some US capability existed to neutralize Soviet nuclear forces. Nevertheless, while by most measures, the US retained strategic nuclear superiority, the Soviets were rapidly narrowing this lead. In particular, the USSR was likewise achieving a secure strategic retaliatory capability themselves by rapid deployments of ICBMs protected in hardened silos, and SLBMs under the sea. (S) In the minds of many analysts, these changing strategic realities raised serious questions as to the continued effectiveness of our nuclear deterrent. While virtually all believed our strategic forces and plans adequate to deter a major nuclear attack on the US, they were uncertain that the threat of large-­scale nuclear retaliation provided the best deterrent to lesser attacks or threats to the US and its allies. Moreover, the
