World Hunger and Food Policy 789 culturally appropriate, generally village-level technology. There must be more willingness to [not?] wait for paid professionally-trained experts, even though they are important, and more emphasis upon the immediate use of simpler voluntary efforts stressing self-help and a sense of dedication similar to that which allowed the Chinese to overcome their food deficit. Status of Current U.S. Policies Our past and current efforts to address the world hunger problem have been marked largely by the lack of a cohesive policy and clear-cut goals. At the World Food Conference in 1974,16 we joined other food donor nations in pledging our support for a number of actions, but we have failed to do our part to provide sufficient leadership. Our problems in the past have arisen largely from our inability to separate our motivations and objectives with regard to world hunger from the domestically inspired need to dispose of large commodity surpluses. At present our contribution to solving the world hunger problem involves five loosely associated strategies, all of which have been reasonably successful; but which have developed separately over time rather than as part of an overall policy. • Bilateral Development Assistance—Aimed fundamentally at stimulating increased food production as part of overall development. Some earlier problems have been improved by the “New Directions” mandate established in the Foreign Assistance Act of 1973,17 which instructed the Executive Branch to: —give priority to programs that benefit the poor majority; —emphasize the needs of small farmers and activities that are labor intensive; and —help expand access by the poor to local institutions. • Multilateral Institutions—We have supported multilateral institutions working in the areas of agriculture, food and nutrition. These include the FAO, UN Development Program, World Food Program, UNICEF, the World Bank and other international financial institutions, the World Food Council, and the International Fund for Agricultural Development. • International Food Reserve System—We have supported a system of nationally-held food reserves to stabilize world grain prices and to promote increased world food security. • Food Aid Through P.L. 480—This program has been successful in providing 265 million tons of food, valued at $26 billion, to developing 16 See footnote 5, Document 221. 17 See footnote 10, Document 73.
