Romania Burtica responded that Romania had to be able to pay for what they had to buy in the United States and that was why they needed MFN. Romania also had an important joint venture with Control Data Corporation. (C) The Vice President joked that the Minister was very smart; Control Data was from Minnesota. (C) In referring to contacts with U.S. firms, Burtica noted that the two main problems were with MFN and export licenses. (C) Secretary Klutznick replied that the U.S. had the issue of licenses under review. (U) Turning to international affairs, Burtica said that he would briefly like to inform the Vice President about Ceausescu’s views on a number of important world problems. Romania was concerned about the deterioration of the international situation and felt that we should do everything possible not to allow it to further deteriorate. There were a number of factors which had contributed to this. However, he stated that he did not want to apportion blame. It was important, he stressed, that we try to resolve matters by political means. In regard to CSCE, Romania felt that everything had to be done to ensure that the Madrid Conference took place. He then noted that there were a number of steps which could be taken to improve the atmosphere. The Romanians hoped that SALT II could be ratified. They also felt that theater nuclear weapons should be withdrawn before they were installed. (C) Burtica stressed that Romania did not want an imbalance in Europe, but rather wanted to see new steps toward military disengagement in Europe as well as steps toward a reduction of armaments and defense spending. Regarding Afghanistan, he emphasized the need for a political solution, a cessation of foreign support for anti-government forces, and a withdrawal of Soviet troops. He stressed that the problem in Afghanistan could not be solved by pressure tactics. The Soviets would not yield to pressure. Only a dialogue could lead to a solution. (C) Regarding Iran, Burtica said that Romania wanted to see a reduction in tensions. Economic sanctions would only lead to greater rigidity, both in Afghanistan and Iran. President Bani-Sadr, he said, was having problems with the students. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs, however, was taking a more realistic position. The Romanians believed that pressure simply fed the most extremist forces. (C) Burtica then turned to the question of a new economic order, noting that Romania desired to cooperate with the American side to find practical solutions. Such cooperation was necessary because otherwise conflicts in the region would increase. (C) The Vice President thanked Minister Burtica for his observations. He stated that the United States was very interested to see GE get
