186 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement BL–24. Special National Intelligence Estimate1  Washington, May 19, 1959. CONTINGENT PROSPECTS IN BOLIVIA2 THE ESTIMATE This estimate, prepared in response to a request from the Department of State, is designed to answer the following specific questions. 1. What are the prospects for Bolivia if U.S. aid is continued at about the present level? In this case, moderate MNR3 President Hernan Siles Zuazo will probably be able to remain in office until elections in 1960. U.S. aid will enable him to continue efforts to stabilize the Bolivian economy, though at best progress will continue to be slow. Although by law Siles cannot succeed himself, his successor will almost certainly be a member of the MNR. Because of growing opposition within the party to the U.S.- supported stabilization effort, the electoral period will almost certainly be characterized by an increase in anti-U.S. oratory. However, the next administration, while anxious to avoid antagonizing left-­wing labor elements, will probably cooperate with the U.S. to the extent necessary to assure a continuation of aid. 2. If Siles leaves office for reasons other than a withdrawal of U.S. aid, what group, party, or faction in Bolivia would be most likely to succeed to power? If U.S. aid continues but Siles leaves the presidency before 1960, his most likely immediate successor would be Federico Alvarez Plata, President of the Senate, who is next in the constitutional line of succession. Alvarez Plata’s continuation in office would depend on backing from ex-­president Victor Paz Estenssoro, long-­time party chief and 1 Source: Department of State, INR Files. Secret. According to a note on the cover sheet, this SNIE was submitted by the Director of Central Intelligence, and the following intelligence organizations participated in its preparation: The Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and the Joint Staff. The members of the United States Intelligence Board concurred in the special estimate on May 19, 1959, with the exception of the Atomic Energy Commission representative, the Assistant to the Secretary of Defense, Special Operations, the Director of the National Security Agency, and the Assistant Director, Federal Bureau of Investigation, all of whom “abstained, the subject being out of their jurisdiction.” 2 This estimate supplements NIE 92-58, “The Outlook for Bolivia,” 7 January 1958, which remains generally valid. [Footnote in the source text.] For the text of NIE 92-58, see Document BL–1. 3 Movimiento Nacionalista Revolucionario (Nationalist Revolutionary Movement). In 1952 the reformist MNR led a successful revolution against an incumbent military junta. President Siles was constitutionally elected in 1956 for a four-­year term. [Footnote in the source text.]
