Czechoslovakia 323 degrees nationality, performance in office, popular acceptability, Soviet preferences, and political trends at the time of succession. [classification not declassified] Leading conservative contenders include Bilak, Kapek, Indra, and perhaps Jakes. Bilak, 62, ranks second in the KSC hierarchy and is believed to have the support of hardliners within the Soviet leadership, particularly in ideological circles. Nonetheless, most observers give him little chance of succeeding Husak because of his nationality. Born in Ruthenia, he would be considered a Slovak, and it is virtually a political necessity that the next KSC leader be a Czech. Moreover, Bilak is unpopular with Czechoslovaks of all nationalities because he supported the 1968 invasion and has pursued a consistently hard line on rehabilitation. [classification not declassified] After Bilak, the most prominent conservative is Antonin Kapek. As first secretary of the Prague KSC committee, Kapek heads the party’s most powerful regional organization. Like Bilak, he enjoys strong backing from Soviet conservatives, and he maintains close contacts with the Moscow municipal party organization. An ultraconservative, Kapek flaunted his pro-Soviet sympathies immediately after the invasion and has been associated with the most hardline elements of the KSC. His selection as Husak’s successor would be unpalatable not only to the population at large, but to much of the present Czechoslovak leadership. [classification not declassified] Alois Indra, 58, chairman of the Federal Assembly, was Moscow’s choice to head a “revolutionary government” in August 1968, but the scheme failed in the face of Dubcek’s massive popular support. Indra suffered another setback in December 1971, when he “resigned” from the KSC Secretariat to assume his present, largely ceremonial position. Indra is politically astute and could count on Soviet support, but his long absence from full-time party activity and his unpopularity stemming from 1968 are considerable obstacles to his becoming head of the party. [classification not declassified] Jakes, 56, has been considered a potential rival to Husak since the early 1970s, when he directed the purges as chairman of the Central Control and Auditing Commission. His appointment as a party secretary and candidate member of the Presidium in December 1977 appeared to be a major step in a rapidly advancing career. As noted above, however, Jakes’s loss of responsibility for cadre affairs may represent a considerable setback, and he will find it difficult to achieve distinction overseeing Czechoslovak agriculture. His best chance for the succession would probably be as a compromise candidate in the event of a deadlock among more senior conservative contenders. [classification not declassified] If the trends described above continue, Husak’s successor is more likely to be a moderate than a conservative. The foremost candidates
