930 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement 583. Letter 39 from McConaughy to Johnson1 Letter No. 39 Washington, April 20, 1956 Dear Alex: There is not much pass on to you this time. I am enclosing a copy of Defense’s instruction to the MAC on the missing servicemen. This instruction gives the Defense analysis of the shortcomings in the ­Communist so-­called accounting of March 1. This was drafted about three weeks ago in Defense and has just been cleared. Your prediction as to the likely reaction of Wang to our second revision of the renunciation of force draft was accurate. I should be sur­ prised if his considered reaction at the next meeting is any different from his off the cuff response at the meeting yesterday. However he will be somewhat more on the defensive following this initiative of ours. You will be able to press him very hard to come up with some revi­ sion of his own which would take into account our minimum require­ ments. We have just received your 1799 and will have some comments on Monday or Tuesday. We are about ready to mail copies of the Agreed Announcement to the individuals named by Wang whose addresses we have been able to find. We have decided to send out a mere one sentence transmitting letter. It will be in mimeograph form on State Department letterhead but without signature. It will be a circular and the names and addresses will appear only on the envelope. In this way we hope to avoid causing any particular uneasiness on the part of the recipient. The letters will be sent by registered mail and the Indian Embassy will be informed. How­ ever, we will not give the addresses to the Indian Embassy. At this stage we of course want nothing said about this project to anyone. A copy of the proposed form letter is enclosed along with the printed copy of the Agreed Announcement which we are using. This is the same printed form which was placed on Post Office Bulletin Boards all over the coun­ try. You will note it mentions the Indian Embassy in Washington and gives the address. We are in rather a bad situation with the COCOM and CHINCOM countries because of the delay in the formulation of a U.S. position on the proposed relaxation of the trade controls. We are between the fry­ ing pan and the fire on this because of strong congressional sentiment against any concessions at this time. The Foreign Aid Bill may be jeop­ ardized if any concessions are made. Yet the British, the ­Japanese and 1 Source: Department of State, Geneva Talks Files, Lot 72D415. Secret; Official–­ Informal.
