1100  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
by possible loss of communications and command personnel. Unless 
someone wishes to express views on this subject, the Council will note 
that OCDM is studying this question.
5. Perhaps the Council would now like to address itself to the ques­
tions posed on page 1 of the Discussion Paper, and to related provisions 
of the proposed Record of Action which is before you.
Question No. 1. Is there discussion on this question?
Question No. 2. Is there discussion on Question No. 2? The Council 
will note that paragraph c of the proposed Record of Action contem­
plates a study by the Department of Defense on this subject; and the 
submission of a report which would be included in the annual report 
on the status of the military program.
Question No. 3. This question was alluded to in the presentation by 
the Defense Department. This subject is treated in paragraph d of the 
proposed Record of Action, which provides that I would confer with 
the President and the Secretary of Defense regarding the proposal for a 
study relating to the matter.
Question No. 4. Is there discussion on this question? The Council 
will note that paragraph a of the proposed Record of Action contem­
plates that OCDM is to review the full-­out shelter policy and will report 
on progress of the program in an early report to the Council.
Question No. 5. Is there discussion on this question? It will be noted 
that paragraph f of the proposed Record of Action refers to the cur­
rent re-­examination of the subject by OCDM for use in the review of 
Continental Defense policy.
Question No. 6. Is there discussion on this question? This subject is 
covered in paragraph g of the proposed Record of Action. In this con­
nection, I propose that paragraph g of the Record of Action be revised to 
read: “Noted that any test which involves destroying a satellite or space 
vehicle should not proceed without specific Presidential approval.”
6. It will be noted that the Discussion Paper does not include the 
Internal Security provisions of Continental Defense Policy (which are 
being separately considered in the PB), nor the provisions dealing with 
Port Security (which have already been revised following separate con­
sideration by the Council).
