236  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
problems. Actually only difference between us was the word “now” in 
our section. I was entirely willing leave word in both sections or take 
out of both sections and I left choice up to him.
Wang said we could also delete “in any such case” from both sec­
tions, but I insisted it must be retained. Wang then repeated his earlier 
arguments and continued maintain his proposals were reasonable.
I said Americans to leave China all required obtain exit permits 
whereas in US no exit permits required and thousands Chinese able 
freely depart except group 120-odd whose restriction orders have 
since been withdrawn. It would be extremely difficult try to reflect all 
these facts in single sentence. I did not see any purpose in trying to 
cover again all ground we had been over. I made suggestion quickly 
this morning with idea it would enable us quickly reach agreement on 
announcement. Wang said we will reach agreement if we are both will­
ing to do so. He suggested although his earlier proposal very reason­
able, he now willing consider deletion both phrases “now” and “in any 
such case” from both sections. Thus both sections identical and he had 
made substantial compromise.
I rejected his suggestion saying at beginning of meeting I had sug­
gested deletion “now” on understanding remainder statement would 
remain unchanged and I could not agree deletion phrase “in any such 
case” from our section.
Wang said my side might be satisfied but that his was not and 
no purpose served continue argument. Main point was he wanted 
announcement reflect exact situation as it was and solve question 
return civilians. Under these circumstances, although he not satisfied 
with two points I had raised, he would make greatest effort we could 
expect of him and delete “now” in both sections and retain “in any 
such case” in both. He said he could not go any further to meet my 
request.
I accepted his proposal and asked whether remainder of text 
would be same as my draft text of September 6. We exchanged texts 
and after checking, he raised question why I had deleted word “respec­
tive” before “governments” in introductory paragraph.
I explained it deleted in order make smoother English text and not 
to change meaning in any way. Following some discussion I agreed to 
include it.
Wang then said in second paragraph Chinese text he had words 
“the question of” preceding “Chinese”. I remarked that if we said “with 
respect to the question of Chinese” instead of “with respect to Chinese” 
it involved some difference in substance.
