28
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
the present permitted rate of overall import growth (6 percent
annually).2
As it stands, MFA affords us the necessary flexibility to seek lower im-
port growth limits for particular products or countries in subsequent
bilateral negotiations. We intend to seek such relief in appropriate
cases.
W. Michael Blumenthal3
2 On March 7, the EPG Executive Committee decided that the U.S. delegate to the
Geneva MFA renewal negotiations “should favor straight extension of MFA and should
not favor tightening of the MFA’s import growth factor unless tightening appears neces-
sary to secure renewal of MFA. Apart from the instructions, however, the administration
would make clear to domestic industry and labor that bilateral quota negotiations would
be aggressively pursued where necessary to prevent undue disruption of U.S. markets by
imports.” (Minutes of the Economic Policy Group Executive Committee, March 7; Carter
Library, Staff Office Files, Council of Economic Advisers, Charles L. Schultze Subject
Files) The Multi-Fiber Arrangement was renewed in December 1977 for 4 years.
3 Blumenthal signed “Mike” above this typed signature.
9.
Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of the Treasury
for International Affairs-Designate (Bergsten) to Secretary of
the Treasury Blumenthal1
Washington, March 16, 1977
SUBJECT
Trade Policy Strategy—Meeting on March 17 with Schultze, Strauss and Cooper
Issue
Our trade policy faces five fundamental problems:
(1) Japan is running a trade deficit of $20 billion annually with
OPEC and other resource producing countries, and a services deficit
with all countries of about $7 billion. Hence it must run sizable trade
surpluses with the U.S., Europe, and other LDC’s. Both aggregate and
sectoral (presently, steel and color TV) problems are thus inevitable for
the indefinite future.
(2) The LDCs are coming (textiles, shoes). They are the real threats
in more labor intensive industries. But they must keep going if their de-
1 Source: National Archives, RG 56, Records of Assistant Secretary of the Treasury
for International Affairs C. Fred Bergsten, 1977–1979, Box 1, BP–4–1 Briefing Memos—
WM Blumenthal 1977. No classification marking. A copy was sent to Solomon.
