February 1951–February 1952
79
22.
Telegram From the Station in Iran to the Central Intelligence
Agency1
Tehran, May 3, 1951.
TEHE 121. Re: TEHE 079 (IN 36119). Part One.
1. For our post operational planning estimate of situation 1 May
1951 follows.
2. Majlis selection Mosadeq to succeed Ala on 26 April 1951 came
as great surprise even to Seyyid Zia who apparently expected be
chosen but believes Mosadeq has committed political suicide and is
not displeased. Ala resigned because of conviction Majlis and Senate
would pass oil bill in spite of his private opposition and recognition in-
ability to execute. UK protest probably spurred Ala’s action and Majlis
determination pass oil bill. Mosadeq has replaced Ala’s policy employ
limited force maintain order by policy appeal patriotism Iran. Public to
refrain action and avoid disorder. Lack of incident 1 May 1951 first test
validity this approach. Mosadeq program of strengthening political in-
dependence, assuring economic independence, and extending social
justice, well-being and peace of all classes of the population widely
welcomed. Cabinet members not yet selected. Ambiguities of oil bill
make manner implementation uncertain. Execution Mosadeq program
will probably bring showdown between vested interests which have ef-
fectively sabotaged past efforts political and social reform and the ill
defined and semi-articulate group composed of white-collar workers,
intellectuals, students, shopkeepers and skilled laborers. It is from
group that Tudeh has derived its main support but this has been to
some extent diverted by the National Front and could be even further
diverted by Mosadeq’s continued success. Such diversion will be op-
posed by Tudeh sympathizers who may be expected to exert every ef-
fort gain control Mosadeq Government. This will split the National
Front and present a serious danger. If Mosadeq can pass liberal legisla-
tion on the political front and provide enough money on the economic
front to improve living condition of his followers his prospects of de-
feating Tudeh are good. If he can control it the potential force at Mo-
sadeq’s disposal is probably sufficient to overcome much of the opposi-
tion of the vested interests. It is also unlikely if Mosadeq succeeds that
Shah will or can oppose him in his program or reform. Mosadeq’s age
and ill health provide further uncertainty in any forecast.
Part Two.
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, DDO Files, Job 79–01228A, Box 11, Folder 14,
Iran 1951–1953. Top Secret.
