1977  151
to successfully deploy an ALCM in a fairly quick and orderly manner 
could be substantial. Specifically, there are abundant signs that the Air 
Force and the JCS still do not completely accept your decision on the 
B–1. Thus, they might seize the opportunity that would be presented by 
a technical problem delaying ALCM deployment to mount a campaign 
to get the B–1 decision reversed or push ahead with the FB–111 H.
Cost Risk. The risk that ALCM production costs might be signifi-
cantly higher if a single program is pursued also seems considerable, 
particularly in view of the fact that, in the absence of competition, the 
environment may be conducive to overpricing. As Harold suggests, 
given a production run of 3000 missiles, a reduction of even 10 percent 
in the projected production costs would completely offset the addi-
tional costs of carrying both ALCM programs.
RECOMMENDATION
Cutting back on our ALCM efforts might send the wrong signal 
both to Congress and the Soviets. Given these considerations, I believe 
that we should go along with Harold’s recommendation to support 
both programs, at least for now. I would suggest, however, that you 
have me instruct Harold that, while he can tentatively plan on con-
tinuing to a fly-­off and cost competition between the two missiles, he 
should seek to resolve the major uncertainties in these programs as rap-
idly as possible in order to put you in the best possible position should 
you decide to drop one of the programs in the FY 80 budget cycle.3
3 Carter indicated his approval and initialed the bottom of the memorandum. In 
a September 9 memorandum to Brown, Brzezinski conveyed Carter’s decision, writing 
that “the President has asked me to inform you that while you can tentatively plan on 
continuing to a fly-­off and cost competition between the two missiles, you should seek 
to resolve the major uncertainties in these programs as rapidly as possible in order to put 
the President in the best possible position should he decide to drop one of these programs 
in the FY 1980 budget.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, 
Subject File, Box 42, Missiles: 8–9/77)
