1980  817
aircraft, start engines, and await further instructions. Commander 
in Chief, SAC, subsequently directed that the SAC crews shut down 
engines but remain in their aircraft.
The National Emergency Airborne Command Post (NEACP) at 
Andrews AFB received the initial notification of a possible threat of 
large numbers of SLBMs and automatically initiated actions prepara-
tory to emergency launch. By the time the NEACP had taxied into posi-
tion for takeoff, the SLBM threat no longer appeared on the display 
consoles in the NMCC and the senior watch officer directed the NEACP 
to hold in place. The Pacific Command Airborne Command Post, how-
ever, did launch in response to the indications.2
This incident may appear similar to the false indication of a mis-
sile attack which occurred on November 9, 1979.3 However, that 
event was caused by an inadvertent injection of a test scenario into 
the NORAD computer system. Extensive corrective actions have been 
taken to prevent a similar incident, and all testing and corrective work 
is being transferred to a separate computer system. The cause of the 
events on 3 June is as yet undetermined. All possibilities are being 
pursued. A long term effort will be initiated to determine and correct 
basic problems within the entire system. Until this review is completed, 
the NMCC, SAC and NORAD Command Centers will be on a special 
watch condition known as “Voice Tell,” which insures that a special 
secure telephone connection is in effect to provide a parallel line of 
communications. This will permit information to be passed immedi-
ately from one center to the other, overriding if necessary any false 
computer driven indications of an attack.
Throughout the event on 3 June, the command center personnel 
at all locations performed well and in accordance with established 
directives.
W. Graham Claytor
2 Carter wrote in the left margin next to this and the following paragraph: “What 
caused it? Corrective action?”
3 See Document 167.
