332  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
75.	
Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to 
President Carter1
Washington, August 13, 1978
SUBJECT
The Defense Program—Request for Guidance
This is the memorandum promised you in my note of August 7.2 
Its purposes are to report to you on progress to date on the formulation 
of the FY 80–84 Defense five-­year program and, more importantly, to 
obtain your guidance as we move to the next step in this process which 
so vitally affects the security of our country.
As was explained in my note, I directed the preparation this year 
of balanced five-­year defense programs at three different fiscal levels, 
to permit comparison of how much change in military forces (and, as a 
result, in military risk) each involves—­not only the effect during 1980–
84, but implications for subsequent years as well.
The three fiscal levels used are termed the basic, enhanced and 
decremented. The basic level was developed last November in coor-
dination with OMB, by starting with the $126 billion you requested 
for defense for FY 79, plus real growth of slightly under 3%, plus a 
6% allowance for inflation based on the estimates then available. The 
resulting level in FY 80 is $137.6 billion in FY 80 dollars (although it 
does not adequately allow for the inflation rate now forecast, as is noted 
more fully hereafter).3
The enhanced level adds approximately 4%4 to the basic defense 
program for FY 1980, with slightly greater additions in each intervening 
year so that the enhanced level by FY 1984 is 6% greater than the basic. 
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski 
Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 104, Military Posture: 7–12/78. Secret; Eyes Only. At 
the top of the memorandum Brzezinski wrote: “VU, FE. (The P. has seen.) ZB.” Brown 
sent the memorandum to Carter under an August 13 covering memorandum in which he 
wrote: “Attached is my memorandum on the Defense program and its implications, as 
background for the NSC meeting on Tuesday and for subsequent discussions. I have fur-
nished copies only to Cy and Zbig, and have asked them to treat it as for their eyes only.” 
On Brown’s covering memorandum, Brzezinski wrote: “Sun. p.m. Since Harold wants no 
staffing, I have underlined those key passages that bear on the forthcoming NSC meet-
ing. Z.B.” Next to Brzezinski’s comments, Carter wrote: “Emphasize US achievements. 
Map—US vs SU influence. ACDA Dir.” (Ibid.) For the record of the NSC meeting, see 
Document 76.
2 See Document 74.
3 Carter wrote “?” in the left margin next to this paragraph.
4 The enhancement was obtained by adding 5% for FY 1980 to the Service programs, 
which do not affect such other fixed DoD accounts as retirement pay, and by raising it 
annually up to an increase of 9% for FY 1984. Because these enhancements affected only
