Options Identified I would suggest, therefore, that a non-American of standing in Iranian eyes (McBride? al Madhi?)8 be asked by Waldheim (not by us) to see Khomeini, Beheshti, and other leading members of the Revolutionary Council. He should make it clear that he has an important message for Khomeini himself. Of course, if Waldheim himself goes to Iran, he could convey such a message. Alternatively, an American with standing in Iranian eyes, either a clergyman or a prominent private citizen, could deliver such a message. The advantages of having an American transmit our views would be that the message would have greater credibility in Khomeini’s eyes. (Khomeini is more likely to be responsive to a clergyman than to a private citizen.) The disadvantage of having an American deliver our message is that the more the message is specifically American, the more we appear to be the demandeur. For this reason, I believe a non- American is far preferable. To support such an approach, we could make a greater effort to ask concerned Europeans to seek out their own channels to Iran and especially Khomeini to emphasize, on their part, the grave danger to Iran and to the peace of the area of the prolongation of this conflict. The French, for example, might approach Benjadid to suggest a renewed Algerian/Muslim/Arab effort to talk with Khomeini. Now is the time for us to pull out all stops in getting to all the members of the Revolutionary Council that we can, with a special focus on Beheshti. We could also make a special effort to encourage Islamic representatives to get to Khomeini or those about him. The emphasis in such messages should be on the damage Khomeini is doing to his own revolution and the opportunities he is providing for the left. C. Public Statements Such a private approach could be reinforced by a calculated series of public statements by US officials. These public statements should not concede any points in advance of a decision that the hostages will be released—for example, by simply ruling out interference in Iran’s internal affairs. They should avoid specific threats as well as characterizations of the Iranian position on specific issues, which almost automatically produce denials. And, while never in any way granting the legitimacy of trials or tribunals, they should not focus primary attention on the kinds of general “investigations” the Iranians are hinting at. To do so may only lock the Iranians in. I believe it is better, tactically, to focus our pressures on the main issue of release, and to belittle non-trial “investigations” as charades. 8 Possible channels are being reviewed for you today by NEA. [Footnote is in the original.]
