136
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Gaza. He stressed that acknowledging the right of the Palestinian
Arabs to participate in the determination of their future does not mean
that they would “take their territory with them.” He argued that al-
lowing the Palestinian Arabs to make the decision on the future of the
West Bank and Gaza put them in a position of deciding an important
element of the Jewish future as well. Israel could not accept that.
3. He felt that deferring a decision on the status of the territories
until after five years would allow for a decision on arrangements which
would not be black and white. Here he was echoing Barak’s point on
leaving sovereignty undefined.
Settlements. Secretary Vance began this portion of the discussion by
stating our tentative view that there might be a freeze on both the
number of settlements and the number of people in the settlements.
The future of the settlements would be decided in negotiations among
Israel, Egypt, Jordan, and the Palestinian authority. He acknowledged
that Israel does not agree with this position and believes there should
be some additions in both categories. The Secretary acknowledged that
the Sinai is different because there is a recognized international
boundary and there is no question of sovereignty in the Sinai. There,
we believe settlements should be removed.
In response to questions from Weizman and Dayan, the Secretary
reported that the idea of extending Gaza to include the Yamit settle-
ments had been rejected and that individual Israeli buying of property
in the West Bank is acceptable.
Dayan then explained with some feeling why freezing the number
of settlers is “absolutely impossible.” He said that no one counts people
who go in and go out of a community except in prisons. He also said
that the freezing of the number of new settlements would be unaccept-
able to the Israeli government and that pressing this issue would have
repercussions on other issues. Specifically, he said he did not see how
Israel could agree to large numbers of displaced persons returning to
the West Bank if Israel’s right to allow new settlers to go to the West
Bank had been frozen. If the settlements are frozen, Israel would have
to impose its own freeze on other issues.
Dayan then put forward Israel’s strategy for dealing with this
issue. Israel would put forward a plan describing the number of settle-
ments it proposed to install during the five-year transitional period,
where they would be, and how they would acquire the land without
confiscating it. By putting forward such a plan, Israel would impose on
itself limitations on the settlements for five years and then would agree
to the return of displaced persons and plans for settling the refugees
permanently in Gaza.
Secretary Vance suggested the following formulation: there will be
no new settlements or expansion of existing settlements without the ap-
