September 1953–December 1954
839
346.
Despatch From the Station in Iran to the Chief of the Near
East and Africa Division, Directorate of Plans, Central
Intelligence Agency (Roosevelt)1
[text not declassified]–1472
Tehran, November 13, 1953.
SUBJECT
General—Operational
Specific—A Study of Electoral Methods in Iran
1. Introduction
Elections, as we know them in the West, have never been held in
Iran. In fact, one might almost call the process whereby a private citizen
becomes a Majlis deputy selection rather than election. And, unfortu-
nately, the voter is the least important person in the process. There are a
number of reasons for this state of affairs: a) Political parties, as we
know them, do not exist in Iran, b) 90% of the population is illiterate,
c) the majority of the population live in villages or tribal areas, far from
the centers of political activity and are ignorant of current political de-
velopments, d) due to a, b, and c above, many Persians are indifferent
and negligent in dealing with the problems concerning the fate of the
ruling class, e) the electoral law is full of loopholes which allow factors
other than “the man in the street” to exercise decisive influence over
elections. In addition to these reasons, that portion of the educated class
which is excluded from the ruling class, has a profound hatred of the
latter which is exploited by intensive Tudeh propaganda. At the same
time, due to lack of serious attention regarding improvement of the
country, on the part of previous governments, as well as the influence
and intervention in public affairs by the central government, the British
government and the AIOC, an atmosphere of despair and negligence
has been created, even among the more intelligent and educated class
of the Iranian Society, with the result that even they refrain from con-
structive participation in public affairs and are satisfied to pursue their
separate courses in search of personal interest.
The only organized group which is conducted along the lines of a
political party is the Tudeh. There have been other attempts at orga-
nized party activity, but the foundation of these various organizations
has always been a particular aim or motive, which, once having been
attained eliminates the reason for existence of the organization. The
best example of this is Qavam’s Democratic Party of Iran which was
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, DDO Files, Job 89–00176R, Box 1, Folder 20,
Political Activities—Iran. Secret; Security Information. Sent for the attention of the
Deputy for Psych/Intel. The three enclosures to the despatch are not printed.
