893.00/6063
[Document 435]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (Schurman)
WASHINGTON, March 30, 1925.
No. 877
SIR: The Department has received your despatch No. 2740 of January 29, 1925, in
which you refer to the recent civil warfare in the vicinity of Shanghai and request the
Department’s instructions as to the policy which will be adopted by the Government in
the eventuality of a repetition of a situation such as has recently prevailed at that port.
The Department regards it as impracticable to lay down in advance, otherwise than in
very general terms, its attitude toward a particular situation such as you describe; for its
attitude must depend largely upon the existing circumstances. The complexity and
uncertainty of political events in China at the present time require, for the appropriate
protection of American interests, that the traditional principles of American policy with
respect to that country receive, in their application to particular situations, a flexibility
of treatment which shall at the same time leave their integrity unimpaired and afford no
basis for possible charges of inconsistency or ulterior motives on the part of this
Government.
With regard to the suggestion appearing in the Shanghai press that the interested
Powers establish a neutral zone outside the Settlement and that each of the Powers send
to Shanghai a force of 1000 men for the protection of the Settlement, the Department
approves of the view which you expressed to the British Minister, as reported in your
telegram No. 28, January 18, 11 P.M., that this would be an act of forcible intervention
on Chinese territory, that the American Government would be opposed to such a policy,
and that you would not consider it unless the naval authorities reported that it was an
imperative necessity for the protection of American and other foreign lives in Shanghai.
In this connection, reference is also made to the statement of Admiral McVay, reported
in the Legation’s telegram No. 29, January 19, 1925, that the senior naval officers
decided that the force available was sufficient to keep defeated soldiers out of the
Settlement.
With reference, generally, to the question of protection of American citizens throughout
China, the Department desires to refer to the statement made in its instruction No. 600
of March 15, 1924,29 that “the extent of possible protection, is, and must remain,
substantially that which may be obtained by diplomatic means and by the presence,
