1174 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement President Nardone opened the discussion with a short explanation of the nature of the National Council of Government, stating that this body, with the Minister of Foreign Relations present, constituted the Government, which welcomed the President of the United States as a representative of the cradle of democracy and as a defender of all the democratic institutions of the world. He called attention to the function of the minority in cross-­checking the acts of the Government, to Uruguayans’ pride in their democratic processes, and to the democratic transfer of authority when the previous Government was defeated at the polls after a long tenure in office. Uruguayans are devoted to peace, he said, as a matter of national conscience, believing that only in peace is it possible to make just solutions of the problems of the people. Uruguay has economic and financial matters to work out but wishes to do this within the pattern of continental collaboration and welcomes the discussions in the Americas which have resulted in creation of the Inter-American Bank and other institutions. President Nardone, on behalf of the whole council, then invited President Eisenhower to express his views on international political problems. President Eisenhower responded that he would be pleased to speak from his experience both in the armed forces and as a statesman. War is absurd and peace is imperative in the present circumstances, he said, when a great city such as Montevideo could be converted to dust in seconds. The Soviet Union on one side and the U.S., Great Britain and France on the other have such destructive power that even a surprise attacker would himself be destroyed. The President repeated that with nuclear weapons a general war would be absurd. He went on to say that there is reason for hope for the future but the cost of maintaining deterrent power to prevent aggression is tremendous. It necessarily involves difficulties for the maintenance of living standards, education and well-­being of our people. While the smaller nations cannot participate in this military activity, all the Western countries must be firmly united spiritually. The President warned that the Soviets, recognizing this situation, are going to try to lull the West into a false sense of security and will resort to propaganda, subversion and infiltration to seduce other peoples to deliver up their sovereignty and freedom. He pointed out that the countries in the greatest danger are those on the Asian and European periphery, mentioning specifically Laos, Cambodia, India, Formosa, Viet-Nam, Korea and Iran. We must furnish a great deal of assistance to prevent the development of movements of disintegration in the western world and among free peoples. The President said it is indispensable to give the peoples in Asia and Africa, living in misery unknown in the Americas, the hope and
