746
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
ular, imprisonment, forced labor, and psychiatric confinement for polit-
ical and religious dissidents, and for those seeking to emigrate or to
form free trade unions.
A vote for the World Bank loan at this time would appear to
be inconsistent with the human rights situation in Romania and our
legislation on the MDBs. A positive vote would also make our previous
demarches appear pro forma, given our laws and the prevailing human
rights situation. Moreover, it would appear to be inconsistent with
our posture at Madrid. At the current session of the Madrid CSCE
conference, the U.S. delegation called attention to human rights abuses
in Eastern Europe, including Romania.
For the foregoing reasons, HA recommends abstention on the IBRD
loan to Romania. However, if because of current political events in
Poland, it is not a propitious time for such a vote, HA would propose
that an affirmative vote on the loan be followed by a high-level
demarche similar to the one made to the Romanian Foreign Minister
in March 1979. The demarche, while recognizing positive Romanian
efforts, would emphasize our continuing expectation that the Romanian
government work to improve the human rights situation for its citizens,
particularly in those areas outlined in our March 1979 decision. The
demarche would be supportive of recent statements by C and EUR to
Romanian MFA American Director Bogdan. It would also express U.S.
willingness to move ahead on planning for a Human Rights Roundtable
as we and the Romanians had agreed earlier this year at the Roundtable
held in Bucharest.
Raising our human rights concerns at the level of the Foreign
Minister would convey the importance with which we view these
concerns. It would reinforce our Counselor’s representations by elevat-
ing to an appropriately high level on the Romanian side our seriousness
of purpose. It would further demonstrate a coordinated effort on the
part of the USG to further its human rights policy. Because the cable
at Tab A has no specificity as to when a demarche will be made, at
what level, or whether the specific areas of greatest U.S. concern will
be raised, it represents a significant departure from our 1979 position.
EUR, EB, S/P Positions:
During the Carter Administration, the United States Government
has voted in favor of every loan for Romania which has come before
the IBRD Board. This includes almost $400 million in loans which do
not fall in the “basic human needs” category. Now is not the time to
change our policy and abstain on such loans for Romania. With the
threat of a Soviet invasion hanging over Poland, we do not want to
signal a lessening of our support for Romania. On the contrary, our
efforts should be directed towards measures which will strengthen
