Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978 379 stead, an approach to development which gives the poor a chance to improve their standard of living by their own efforts. • Farmers need good quality seed if they are going to escape subsistence agriculture and grow enough food for their families and to sell at the market as well. Our aid program in Tanzania, for instance, is helping that government establish a seed multiplication project to provide improved seed for the main crops grown there. The impact on the lives of Tanzanian farmers should be large. • In vast sections of West Africa, people cannot live in potentially fertile agricultural areas because of a terrible disease—river blindness. We are helping to finance efforts to suppress this affliction. Some success has been achieved. Small farmers are already beginning to resettle in areas which had been virtually abandoned. • Education is critical to human development. In numerous poor countries, our aid goes to training people in rural and urban areas in basic skills which permit them to earn a better living. Education takes place in many ways besides the schoolroom. It can be carried by low powered local radio programs, such as one we fund in Guatemala, or by direct broadcast satellite TV, as in an experiment we assisted in India. Second, the programs of the World Bank and the regional development banks through which we channel a significant amount of our foreign aid range from large, capital intensive programs, such as dams and roads, to smaller scale programs designed to directly improve the lives of the poor. These institutions can mobilize and coordinate large amounts of capital for development. And they can build consensus between aid donors and recipients on development goals. In performing these roles, they well serve U.S. interests. The work of these institutions is varied. • In Buenaventura, Colombia—one of the poorest cities in the hemisphere—the Inter-American Development Bank is trying to relocate slum dwellers and provide the city with safe drinking water to reduce disease. • In the West African country of Benin, the African Development Fund is improving rural health services by constructing dispensaries in remote areas and training people to run them. • In Burma, an Asian Development Bank loan will increase fish production for domestic consumption, thus raising the low protein intake of the population. Third, we support the development programs of the United Nations, which finance technical assistance to poor countries and provide direct humanitarian assistance to children, refugees, and other groups in need of particular relief.
