376 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI partial test ban, and we see no purpose in reopening it at a time when our agencies should be concentrating on negotiating a complete prohibition on testing. Consequently, we recommend that you approve these tests.4 Standard Missile-2 (SM–2). Two tests, BEAFORT and DANBO, are related to development of a nuclear warhead for the SM–2, a naval air defense system included in a counter to possible Soviet cruise missile threats to our fleet. Originally, however, SM–2 was a tactical ABM, and for this reason these tests are opposed by ACDA and State—as an unfortunate precedent undermining the ABM Treaty. Harold Brown is in a bind. He feels the SM–2 (designed in the mid 1960’s) is obsolete and has indicated that he is not convinced that “the military value of the SM–2 is worth the costs—financial, doctrinal and political.” He feels that the high altitude cruise missile threat can be met quite well by other systems. However, because of Navy pressure, he has gone along with ERDA’s request for the tests to keep options open should new studies change his mind. OMB objects on programatic grounds and believes DOD should decide what it wants before testing warheads. Since the option to proceed with SM–2 will remain even without the tests, and given the other considerations, we recommend deletion of the BEAFORT and DANBO tests from FULCRUM II.5 Insertable Nuclear Warheads. The final issue concerns ACDA’s recommendation for deferral of a test, KNIGHTHEAD, which is related to development of insertable nuclear components for naval weapons. Defense opposes deferral of this test, noting that it is of great interest for possible future warhead options and could enhance nuclear safety and warhead security with a reduction in operational costs. This concept would permit storage of the nuclear components in a single area of a ship and could effectively increase its conventional firepower since it would permit conventional use of firing positions and magazine storage currently reserved for nuclear weapons use. However, this development would also make many conventional weapons into potentially nuclear ones. This could have serious arms control implications since it would complicate verification of any future limitations on nuclear weapons for naval systems. As a result, ACDA has recommended that you defer approval of KNIGHTHEAD pending an interagency study of the military utility and arms control implications of developing insertable nuclear components. We recommend that you ap- 4 Carter checked the “Approve” option and wrote “J” in the right-hand margin. 5 Carter checked the “Approve” option and wrote “deletion” next to it. He also wrote “J” in the right-hand margin.
