right to obtain compensations as if said country preserved any right over the provinces. The Honorable Secretary of State takes pride in the idea that the proposed solution will insure peace in America. To re-establish the predominance of Right and Peace in America all that is required is to respect justice and to give to each one what belongs to him. That is why the principal statesmen of the world when signing the Treaty of Versailles sought not only formulas which would end controversies, but immutable principles of right. Because of the preceding considerations the Government of Peru has found itself in the difficult position of not accepting the proposal of the Honorable Secretary of State, but in its desire to give it life and seeking the means of at least attenuating the resistance incited by it, in the country, addressed to the Honorable Secretary of State the consultation contained in its Memorandum of the third of December last which was meant only to clear up the conception of his proposal in the part which most deeply affected public sentiment, whether if to agree to the cession of the territories to Bolivia, the will of the inhabitants of said territories was to be consulted or not. The Honorable Secretary of State has unfortunately not yet answered the question. In his Memorandum of 11th of the same month he only refers to the civil rights of said inhabitants referred to in his last proposal, but he says nothing of the political rights of the same, which was the matter consulted. The Peruvian Foreign Office, finds therefore, very much to its sorrow, that it cannot accept the proposal contained in the Memorandum of the 30th of November last. This rejection does not carry with it, nevertheless, the intention of obstructing any other solutions. Far from that, Peru has accepted the partial or complete internationalization of the provinces, has accepted their division giving Bolivia gratuitously an outlet to the shore and there an inlet whose conditions would allow it to be converted into a large, suitable, and safe port. Finally it is disposed to listen to all suggestions for a settlement, but under the condition that the towns of Tacna and Arica be returned to it, the latter with its port and Morro.
