470  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
29. Wang replied that his side regarded dispute in Taiwan area as 
gravest existing dispute between China and US, affecting not only rela­
tions between China and US but also security and peace in Far East. 
Therefore it his view that it would be more practical refer such grave 
problem to conference of Foreign Ministers of our two countries.
30. Wang said if I considered myself fully authorized and able 
assume responsibility for settling question of withdrawal US armed 
forces from Taiwan area, he would join me in discussing this question 
here.
31. I replied that I understood then that negotiations could be car­
ried on at level other than Foreign Minister.
32. Wang said that if I had power settle question to which he had 
referred, he would join me in discussing the problem. He was not try­
ing to evade discussion of the question.
33. I said that next question I wished to raise was one I had raised 
before. We have different views with respect nature of dispute Taiwan 
area. Did he agree that first and most important task is make sure dif­
ferent views do not lead us to war? We recognized there is practical 
situation in area. Overwhelmingly important question of principle was 
that practical situation should not lead us to war.
34. I said he had referred to situation as internal matter and had 
said “conditions permitting” his side would strive for peaceful settle­
ment. As I had pointed out at last meeting, that is very different from 
saying force will not be resorted to in area except defensively.
35. I said obligation to seek peaceful settlement and not to resort to 
force did not revolve about the question of internal matter or interna­
tional matter. Question is whether use of force would endanger inter­
national peace and security.
36. I said he had quoted portions of UN Charter. I would like to 
quote another portion that has pertinence to the situation. I read para­
graph 1, article 33, chapter VI, of Charter.
37. I said test is not whether question is internal or external, but 
whether it affects international peace and security. Same point made 
in article 1 of Charter, which refers to “situations which might lead to 
breach of peace”.
38. I said my purpose is not to get into legalistic argument over 
interpretation of Charter. I simply mean to point out that Charter is one 
of places where principle was enunciated that it is contrary accepted 
standards of international relations use force in situations likely to 
endanger international peace and security.
39. I said I was not asking him accept proposition that problem in 
Taiwan area is not internal. To say force will not be resorted to in Tai­
wan area does not prejudice his position in regard to nature of dispute.
