772  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
for this purpose in FY 60 since GOH revenues are based on a “normal” 
production years.
(3) that the disbursement of special Assistance funds be made by 
the USOM Director in accordance with previous practices and criteria 
established jointly which will be governed by an exchange of letters 
with the Minister of Finance and the President of the National Bank.
A detailed justification for those recommendations is given in the 
following discussion.
[Here follows eight pages of discussion of the recommendations 
indicated above, omitted for Reasons of space.]
HA–20.	
Memorandum from the Assistant Secretary of State for 
Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom) to the Secretary of 
State1

Washington, May 31, 1960.
SUBJECT 
Suggested Letter from President Eisenhower to Haitian President Duvalier concern-
ing Consultation on Cooperative Development Program.
Discussion
A special mission is being sent to Haiti about June 2 to consult 
with Ambassador Drew and President Duvalier on problems affecting 
the economic development program there. It would contribute to the 
success of this special mission if President Eisenhower would send a 
letter to President Duvalier on this occasion. The suggested text of such 
a letter and a memorandum concerning this proposal are attached for 
your review and forwarding to the President, if you approve.2 If the 
message is approved, it is recommended that it be released only on the 
initiative of President Duvalier.
Serious problems have disrupted our cooperative development 
program in Haiti in recent months, culminating on May 25 in “popu-
lar” demonstrations apparently inspired by the Haitian Government 
1 Source: Department of State, Rubottom-Mann Files, Lot 62 D 418, “Haiti 1960.” 
Confidential; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Warner.
2 Neither printed. The memorandum for the President, dated June 1 and signed by 
Herter, is in the Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, International File.
