Chapter 3, June 1989–January 1990 279 13. In the mobiles working group, as well as elsewhere, the Soviets have been giving the most positive signals to date about unique identifiers. They now favor “registration” of all strategic offensive arms, which means they are once again extending a U.S. concept further than we intended it to go. With or without some sort of agreement on this in the V/S context, we should demonstrate our tagging devices and press for clarification of their ideas. SLCMs 14. As expected, the Soviets have put heavy emphasis on SLCMs here. They have not, however, presented any new ideas on the subject. I suspect their next move on SLCMs will not come until after their experiment with the NDRC in the Black Sea is concluded and the results publicized. Given our emphasis on demonstrations in our proposed V/S measures, a renewed Soviet push for a SLCM verification experiment would not be surprising. I think we need to take seriously the possibility that they will begin to stonewall on START issues of importance to us until some sort of real dialogue on a solution to the SLCM problem begins. They continue to show no interest in our declaratory approach and perhaps we need to push it more aggressively. Unlike linkage, which I believe can be dealt with largely politically as an endgame issue if that is our preference, we may not be able to keep sweeping the SLCM problem under the rug much longer. Intelligence Tidbits 15. Several points came out in my opening lunch with Roslyakov that seemed to me too sensitive to include in the memcon (START memcon XI-M-002)2: — He strongly implied that Obukhov had wanted to return to Geneva, but was not allowed to do so because of his involvement in INF. He has said on several occasions that some high-­level officials in Moscow were appalled when they realized what had been agreed to in INF. The major problem apparently was the highly intrusive and generally bothersome verification provisions. He had earlier said that general Medvedev, the senior military rep in INF, should have played the same role in START, and implied that he was kept from doing so because of displeasure with what he had agreed to in INF. — Given that Obukhov could not return, Roslyakov said that Yuli Vorontsov would have been the “best choice” as NST negotiator. There is no dissatisfaction with Vorontsov’s work on the Afghanistan 2 Reference is to telegram 5472 from NST Geneva, May 27, 1989 (Department of State, Central Foreign Policy File, Electronic Telegrams, D890551–0625)
