Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII late June, the provincial governor reported that most districts were in insurgent hands and that an attack on the provincial capital was imminent. Judging by military operations there, the situation has not been quite so critical recently—the Soviets have been able to rely largely on Afghan troops—and insurgency is strongest in the remote southern part of the province. Qonduz There was only minor insurgency in Qonduz province before the Soviet invasion, but since then it has been a serious problem for the Soviets. Although the province is important because it contains the major river port at Shir Khan on the Soviet-Afghan border and the road south toward Kabul, the Soviets initially left security there to Afghan forces. By March, insurgents had taken control of most of the countryside, and urban dissidents were in virtual control of the provincial capital. In April Soviet troops moved into the capital, conducted clearing operations in the province, and restored some semblance of order. Insurgency, nevertheless, is at a considerably higher level than before last December. At no time does there appear to have been a threat to Shir Khan. Samangan Samangan was one of the country’s quieter provinces before the Soviet invasion. By June, faced with weak Afghan forces, the insurgents were strong enough to attack the provincial capital twice in a single day. Insurgent control appears to be strongest in the south, in part because of the presence of Hazaras from neighboring Bamian. Balkh Balkh has been among the quietest of Afghanistan’s provinces despite sporadic dissidence, especially in the southern part of the province. There have been assassinations, strikes, and sabotage in Mazari-Sharif, the provincial capital and the country’s fourth largest city, but much less unrest than in Kabul, Herat, or Qandahar. Jowzjan In Jowzjan, like most of the northern provinces, the most serious insurgency has been in the south. The weakness of government forces, however, has allowed the insurgents to gain control of much of the province and on occasion threaten the provincial capital. Faryab The situation is much the same in Faryab, where the government’s main military concerns have been with insurgency along the southern part of its border with Jowzjan province, and the threat from insurgents in Badghisat.
