280  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
D. CHICOMS may alternatively counter with position this not 
“practical matter” unless and until recognition contemplated at which 
time “will be easy to resolve”.
E. In unlikely event properties restored this would lead directly to 
question UK representation US interests in PRC and reciprocal repre­
sentation PRC interests in US by GOI.
F. Have imperfect recollection concerning our returning title to 
GRC properties acquired under surplus property agreement following 
World War II. Am not clear what effect this would have on extent resti­
tution demand we would make on CHICOMS.
Shillock
213.	 Telegram 758 from Geneva1
Geneva, September 21, 1955, 4 p.m.
758. From Johnson.
1. Subject Department’s suggestions, at Friday’s meeting I 
plan give Wang all further available info on our implementation of 
announcement, inform him departure Tsien, numbers additional Chi­
nese who have departed, etc. Would hope could make unqualified 
statement Indian Embassy already functioning as envisaged agreed 
announcement.
2. Will then make carefully prepared and balanced statement noting 
progress thus far made with respect PRC implementation announcement 
but with note being serious dissatisfaction with rate of progress release of 
Americans in jail. Of 29 Americans in jail or under house arrest beginning 
these talks have thus far promised release 10 of whom 9 out and 19 still 
remain jail with no apparent steps taken effect their release. This is not 
“expeditiously.”
3. Will also express dissatisfaction with his attitude at last meeting 
on my request for info on health and welfare of Americans still in jail and 
unanswered questions on implementation announcement.
4. Will also contrast our prompt action with respect India with 
their dilatoriness with respect UK, working in latest available informa­
tion on this situation at time of meeting.
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/9–2155. Secret; Limited Distribution.
