Venezuela 1279 Presidential press secretary Stredel “it is great to see the old dictator on opposite side of fence for a change but we still see his extradition a little far off. Let us hope justice is done.” Presidential private secretary Yabrudy “too great to be true, time will tell if they are really going to send him to U.S.” All local papers featured headline news of arrest and released on bail. Press, favorably impressed by arrest, increasingly insistent Perez Jimenez be returned LA. ESFERA frontpage editorial typifies attitude: first favorable impression caused by reported arrest was set back by news that Perez Jimenez had been released on bond which, while adequate for others, is insignificant in case of Perez Jimenez who has robbed millions from public treasury; Venezuelan and continental democratic opinion expects State Department to honor extradition request based on Venezuela’s faith in U.S. fulfillment of international commitments “we look on preventive arrest of Perez Jimenez as best evidence for confidence in rectitude of U.S. justice and we expect extradition to make just amends for blood, sweat and tears shed by Venezuelans for ten years in cause of liberty.” Burrows VE–34. Memorandum of a Conversation, Caracas, Venezuela, August 27, 19591  Caracas, August 27, 1959. I called on the President at his home, where he is working while he is on a 2-­week “vacation”. The interview was arranged at my request for the purpose of conveying a message from Assistant Secretary Mann and Ambassador Sparks as instructed by Department telegram 153.2 I first read to the President the message from Mr. Mann and Ambassador Sparks, translating it as I read. The President nodded 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 731.5-MSP/8–2859. Confidential. Drafted by Burrows, and transmitted to the Department of State, under cover of despatch 15 from Caracas, August 28, 1959. 2 The referenced telegram, August 26, 1959, requested to the Chargé to deliver orally a message to Betancourt which read, in part: “Due to circumstances beyond its control it will not be possible to reach a definitive decision on question of possible relaxation of import controls or residual fuel oil for burning until week commencing September 7. U.S. general position is that country quotas for petroleum imports or exports would be counterproductive. . . .” (411.006/8–2659)
