212 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 tion. He did not intend to hear the cases until after Easter. This was a hearing by Judge (Goff?) in chambers. He wanted to ascertain American interest in intervening in the case. We have counsel in London and are preparing a response. Bank Markazi had raised no objection. Our objective will be to hold to that calendar. The President said that was the best news he had heard for some time. He wondered if they could have their case prepared by Easter. Mr. Cutler responded that they would be prepared by Easter to go till the following Easter. This was a very good start. Secretary Miller said he would not review the status of the New York cases. The next area was the French where the Iranians were seeking an order compelling transfer of funds. Our officials have sought a delay on the grounds that this is a grave matter which requires consultations. Should the Ambassador go to the Prime Minister? (The President said yes.) We will now be able to point to the British court ruling that this is not just a standard case of commercial law. The President asked about Volcker’s position. Secretary Miller said he now agreed, particularly since it was becoming very clear that Iranian withdrawals would have left our banks high and dry. The President said he should tell that to the German Banks. Secretary Miller then turned to the question of getting multilateral cooperation. The first step should be triggering cross default provisions to protect their own claims against Iran. This must not be just U.S. banks. This step is the easiest to do. It does not require a government decision to impose sanctions, but it would be very effective and would support the dollar. If instituted by the Germans, Japanese and others, the Iranians would have trouble finding a place to put their money and it would force them into using dollars. The President asked what would prevent the Iranians from isolating us, since they had excellent relations with all of the other countries. Secretary Miller replied that what was binding was the $15 billion of liabilities and the fact that they had their cash spread around in such a way that they would have extreme difficulty meeting claims quickly without moving money into the U.S. This option would make it more difficult to do what they are doing now, i.e., demanding that others pay them in currencies other than dollars and holding out the bait of substantial new deposits to cooperative banks. It would certainly hold them off for one or two months at least. Secretary Vance asked whether we should also approach Italy, the Netherlands and Canada. Secretary Miller went on with his explanation that loans were syndicated among many banks. If loan A was called, it was then proper
