760  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
be appropriate in circumstances, keeping in mind U.S. policy objectives 
in Haiti of fostering economic growth and financial equilibrium within 
framework political stability and responsible government. Pursuant 
recent recommendations from Embassy on specific problems (des-
patch 338 re USMC mission, Embtels 311, 290 re financial emergency3) 
Department had acted on premise best hope for stability and progress 
in Haiti is to work with present constitutional government to solve spe-
cific problems. Does country team believe this premise still valid? If not, 
Department solicits recommendations for change in U.S. approach to 
problems Haiti.
Meanwhile, Department believe recent constructive U.S. action alle-
viate financial crisis in Haiti provides good basis for approach to President 
Duvalier along following lines. (1) We have been closely observing 
developments and doing all we properly can assist constitutionality sta-
bility in Haiti by working out Marine Corps training mission, emergency 
financial aid, increased technical cooperation program, surplus food 
program, [illegible in the original] vessel visits and taken other steps to 
aid GOH in alleviating distress of Haitian people. In doing so, we have 
tried avoid involvement in internal Haitian political affairs and with that 
in mind came to understanding with President Duvalier in September 
1958 to guard against military training assistance being misinterpreted 
as political interference. The President should be reminded of his under-
standing at that time to take steps to allay political tensions and of our 
having reserved right to curtail activities or withdraw mission in case of 
internal political violence. (2) While mindful of outside pressures on his 
government which we seeking to allay, we are troubled by recent devel-
opments which appear run counter to September understanding and 
give color opposition charges GOH relies on force not popular support 
and which hinder our efforts in behalf of Haitian stability. As appropriate 
you should mention such examples as (a) press reports quoting Cuban 
police authorities that gunmen recently arrested in Cuba say they were 
hired to kill Dejoie and other Haitian exiles; (b) reports from press and 
other sources of one alleged Dejoieist killed and another severely beaten 
in Port-­au-Prince recently, and other apparently unwarranted political 
reprisals, despite January assurances given by President; (c) Department 
further seriously concerned over statements widely attributed to 
President Duvalier published in press of Haiti and elsewhere (and not 
disavowed to date) and with damaging repercussions, that President 
called on his followers to “chop off heads and burn houses” if revolution-
ary attack made. This interpreted as invitation to indiscriminate, unre-
strained mob violence and has deeply shocked responsible U.S. opinion. 
(3) We have felt constrained to discuss these matters with President in 
3 None printed; filed respectively under 738.58/2–1859, 398.13/2–1759 and 
838.10/1–2259.
