206 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement Mr. Gordon Gray commented that Secretary McGuire’s office was doing a splendid job on those responsibilities for the mobilization base which pertained to the Department of Defense. On the other hand, ODM was gravely concerned about the three problem areas which Secretary McGuire had mentioned in his report, and particularly the last one, namely, the lack of any bomb damage assessment. Mr. Gray said that ODM was also concerned about a matter relat­ ing to the prepositioning of military supplies. While some protection was being afforded to military materiel prepositioned overseas, there was no adequate protection for military materiel prepositioned in the United States. The President noted that one reason which clearly explained the need for affording greater protection to existing military supplies had derived from the conclusions of the studies by the Net Evaluation Subcommittee. These results had indicated that even after a not too devastating Soviet nuclear attack on the United States it would be extremely difficult to go on producing any single military end-­item because components which went into the production of the end-­item were manufactured in a variety of different cities, all of which would be target areas in a Soviet attack. Mr. Gray said that the subject of the President’s comment—­the so-­called vertical factor of production—­also concerned him. The component situation had not improved. Secretary McElroy predicted that it would not improve in the future, and suggested that there were good reasons why it should not improve. Mr. Gray then pointed out what he considered to be a develop­ ment which needed to be watched and which was under study in the ODM. It would appear that under the new mobilization planning con­ cept if we could assume that limited war would last for as long as three years the United States would not be confronted, as in past wars, by the familiar conflict between guns and butter. Instead, it might face a serious unemployment problem. This was true because under the new mobilization planning concept we no longer assume full-­scale mobili­ zation daring a war. The National Security Council: Noted and discussed an oral report on the subject by the Depart­ ment of Defense, prepared pursuant to NSC Action No. 1680–­b, as presented by Assistant Secretary of Defense McGuire and commented upon by the Director, Office of Defense Mobilization. [Omitted here is the remainder of the memorandum.] S. Everett Gleason
