1956  663
8. Wang said thus it evident that amended draft put forward by me 
Jan 12 and my original draft Nov 10 contain practically no difference 
and therefore it not acceptable.
9. Wang said my side on one hand suggested inside conference 
room that announcement on renunciation force be issued. However 
on other hand over an extended period US side not willing arrive at 
agreement this question. This cannot but raise question as to sincerity 
of professed desire settle issues between China US.
10. Wang said furthermore he would like point out in our previous 
meetings I stated that talks between us must not be held under threat of 
force. Yet US Secretary State Mr. Dulles had been clamoring recently for 
atomic war against China. Was this not outright threat?
11. Wang said if Mr. Dulles thinks Chinese people can be intimi­
dated by threats and that Chinese people can be forced give up their 
sovereign rights this entirely wishful thinking.
12. Wang said it is well to recall that Korean armistice, restoration 
peace in Indochina as well as withdrawal from Tachen Islands, all these 
events have sufficiently demonstrated fact that forces of world people 
for peace and justice cannot be stopped, whereas policy of position of 
strength and atomic blackmail doomed failure.
13. Wang said recent warlike utterances of Secretary not only pro­
voked greatest indignation on part Chinese people but also condemned 
by people of other countries including peace loving people in US. Could 
these utterances be reconciled with purposes present talks? Could these 
utterances be reconciled with further desire for progress?
14. Wang said all these events cannot but raise question as to 
whether U.S. has genuine sincerity to settle peacefully issues and dis­
putes between China and U.S.
15. I replied extemporaneously saying Wang had again this morn­
ing spoken of sincerity. He had made remarks concerning Secretary of 
State which entirely uncalled for. I believed that record of U.S. in world 
affairs as well as record in these talks speaks for itself.
16. I said U.S. has demonstrated not just in words but in actions its 
devotion to cause of peace. It has also demonstrated not just in words 
but in actions its devotion to supporting freedom and independence of 
all peoples.
17. I said U.S. has demonstrated not only by words but by actions 
its complete lack any aggressive intent whatsoever not only towards 
other countries but also towards Wang’s country.
18. I said Wang had mentioned Korea. I was sure there is not in 
history of world any greater example of self-­restraint and lack aggres­
sive intention towards other people than that demonstrated by U.S. in 
Korean hostilities. Actions of forces under control of Wang’s government
