1342  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
321.	 Memorandum From Twining to McElroy1
Washington, April 30, 1958
SUBJECT
Nuclear Testing (U)
1. Reference is made to the memorandum by the Joint Chiefs of 
Staff, dated 13 March 1958, subject as above, and to the memorandum 
by the Deputy Secretary of Defense for the Ad Hoc Panel on Nuclear 
Test Cessation, dated 21 March 1958, subject: “The Effects of Total Sus­
pension or Cessation of Nuclear Testing.”
2. In these memoranda the effect of a cessation of nuclear testing on 
the United States relative to the USSR was analyzed. Based on this anal­
ysis these memoranda reflected the belief that, unless considered only 
as a part of a larger disarmament proposal to include suspension in the 
production of weapons and weapons material and an effective inspec­
tion system the over-­all long-­range effects of a test cessation will be to the 
distinct disadvantage of the United States. In view of recent increased 
pressures for the cessation of tests the Joint Chiefs of Staff consider a reit­
eration and amplification of their views on this subject necessary.
3. The Joint Chiefs of Staff consider that an adequate military position 
for the United States will not be attained until there is available a complete 
spectrum of weapons compatible with modern delivery systems, which 
will make it possible to apply selectively adequate force against any 
threat. Among the programs of weapon development for which future 
testing will be essential in order to provide this flexibility are:
a. Small, low-­yield, highly mobile weapons for tactical and ASW 
uses.
b. Modern, light-­weight, and instantly ready weapons of sophisti­
cated design for use against hostile aircraft.
c. Warheads for anti-­missile use.
d. Deterrent and retaliatory weapons, including warheads for sec­
ond generation IRBM, ICBM, and FBM missiles.
e. A family of clean weapons.
4. The HARDTACK test series now underway, including the sched­
uled firing at Johnston Island prior to 1 September, is vital to the defense 
of the United States. Certain key shots, particularly those essential to 
the design and operational employment of the anti-­missile missile, are 
crucial in the weapons development program. As past tests bear out, it 
cannot be presumed that this test series will be a total success or will 
1 Source: Views of the JCS on suspension of nuclear testing. Top Secret. 3 pp. Library 
of Congress, Manuscript Division, Twining Papers, Chairman’s Files.
