1978  387
	
Tab B
	
Paper Prepared in the Department of Defense4
Washington, undated
Seminar on ICBM Vulnerability & Responses
1. Purpose
(S) [2 lines not declassified] The impact of this threat and poten-
tial US responses have been studied this year under the sponsorship 
of a number of organizations: Air Force Scientific Advisory Board 
(AFSAB), Defense Science Board (DSB), JASON and OSTP. This semi-
nar provided a forum for interchange and discussion among represen-
tatives of these groups in an attempt to: 1) examine the convergence of 
the technical community on the basic facts and issues, 2) better focus 
and understand the issues, and 3) separate the issues from the under-
lying technical facts. The discussion was organized in four topic areas: 
1) the threat, 2) the importance of a US response to the threat, 3) the 
most effective basing approach in response, and 4) the most effective 
missile for that basing. There was also a discussion recognizing the 
growing importance of Command, Control and Communications to 
the SLBM and airbreathing legs of the TRIAD in the face of the threat 
to the ICBM.
2. The Threat
(S) [9 lines not declassified] Two groups (JASON and DSB) did not 
examine the threat as a part of their review, but took it as a given. The 
remaining groups (AFSAB, OSTP) had reviewed the threat analysis. 
Representatives from the various groups had examined the threat in 
greater depth within the past two years, and found no basis for dis-
agreement. A more confident assessment of Soviet accuracy (by the 
Soviets as well as the US), as demonstrated in ongoing development 
tests, will probably require about six more months of testing. All groups 
felt it would be useful to conduct an independent threat assessment at 
that time, but that there was no need to defer programmatic decisions 
pending results of more detailed assessment.
3. Response to the Threat
(C) All four panels felt it was important to respond decisively 
and vigorously to the threat. Some felt the need to respond by 1983 in 
reaction to domestic perceptions if not military need. Others felt that 
a gap in an operationally deployed response could be tolerated from 
4 Secret.
