304
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
would be necessary to work with the Saudis to help finance Pakistani
purchases.9 In this connection, the sale of Gerring destroyers to the
Pakistanis would not particularly help them against the Soviets but
would be of enormous political help in Pakistan.
Secretary Brown said that the House has said that these destroyers
should be saved for our naval reserve, but he thought he could get
around the problem. The President noted that Sadat was anxious for
some destroyers. The Secretary of State noted that these Gerring
destroyers were offered to him but, because of their condition, he didn’t
want them.
On the economic side, the Secretary spelled out the other recom-
mendation: an increase in PL 480 assistance and more relief for the
Afghan refugees. On nuclear policy, the Secretary stressed we should
reaffirm our present position and seek a reaffirmation of their present
position; specifically, that they would not build nuclear weapons, they
would not transfer sensitive technology, and there would be no nuclear
tests during Zia’s regime.
The President asked who would head the mission to Pakistan. The
Secretary suggested Deputy Secretary Christopher and someone from
the Defense Department.
The President said our emissary should tell Zia that we are bound
by law on the non-proliferation issue and can’t change it, but let’s try
to get together on Afghanistan and work out the non-proliferation
issue later.
In this connection, Secretary Vance said Pakistani Adviser to the
President for Foreign Affairs, Agha Shahi, had asked him whether we
would sell military equipment to Pakistan if the situation in Afghani-
stan deteriorated. Secretary Vance had already assured him we
would.10
Harold Brown noted that the Pakistanis are going to want to buy
some equipment, such as A-7 aircraft, which we do not wish to sell
9 See Documents 102 and 103. The high-level mission to Pakistan was led by Christo-
pher and Brzezinski. See Document 193. The Symington Amendment to the Foreign
Assistance Act of 1961, passed June 1976, gave Congress authority “to deny U.S. assistance
to governments involved in the sale and purchase of nuclear reprocessing material unless
such transactions are subject to adequate multilateral safeguards against diversion to
weapons use.” (International Security Assistance and Arms Control Act of 1976, P.L.
94–329; 90 Stat. 729 (June 30, 1976)) Carter found Pakistan in violation of the Symington
Amendment and cut off economic and military aid, save food assistance, in April 1979.
On the decision of how to support Pakistan in light of the Symington Amendment, see
Document 151.
10 An apparent reference to talks between Vance and Shahi October 16–17, 1979.
See footnote 2, Document 79.
