512
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
199.
Memorandum From Gary Sick of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, March 5, 1980
SUBJECT
Post-Hostage Iran
This issue is scheduled to be discussed this afternoon at the SCC
Meeting on Security Framework. The State INR paper2 provided for
the meeting focuses very heavily on foreign policy of Iran. It takes
the present political situation in Tehran as its starting point and then
extrapolates what would happen if the hostage situation were removed
as a consideration. In that sense, it is an accurate reflection of the
current conventional wisdom. However, it does not pose the serious
questions in a form which is sharp enough to permit policy decisions.
In fact, the foreign policy of Iran in the post-hostage period will be
determined almost exclusively by internal developments in Iran. This may
not be the moment for a high-level review of the sensitive and difficult
policy choices which we will face, but the following is an attempt to
spell out very briefly the kinds of approaches we might consider, the
kind of operational decisions which we may be required to make, and
some of the larger strategic issues which we will wish to consider.
Evolution vs. Activism
The State paper explicitly adopts an evolutionary approach. It takes
the present system, structure, and personalities as its starting point and
then considers how we can nurse it along toward our desired objectives of:
—A reasonably stable and unified Iran which is
—Strongly resistant to pro-Soviet subversion and external threats,
—Accessible to the West for political dialogue and economic
development,
—Willing to maintain mutually beneficial contact with the U.S. on
issues of concern to both countries, and
—Continued production of significant quantities of oil.
[1 paragraph (8½ lines) not declassified]
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office File, Box
64, Outside the System File, Iran Non-Meetings Hostage Crisis 1/80–3/80. Secret. A
stamped notation in the upper right corner of the memorandum reads: “ZB has seen.”
2 See Document 192.
