3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
July–December 1979
717
“Begin text:
“Dear Mister President,
“In answer to your message of 29 December I consider it necessary
to inform you of the following.
“It is impossible to agree with your evaluation of what is occurring
in the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan. We have sent through your
Ambassador to Moscow in a confidential manner to the American side
and to you personally a clarification based on facts of what is actually
occurring there, as well as the reasons which caused us to respond fa-
vorably to the request of the Government of Afghanistan for the intro-
duction of limited Soviet military contingents.
“The attempt taken in your message to cast doubt on the very fact
of the request itself of the Government of Afghanistan for sending our
forces to that country seems strange. I am compelled to note that it is
certainly not a question of anyone’s perception or lack of perception of
this fact, or agreement or disagreement with it, which determines the
actual state of affairs, which consists of the following.
“The Government of Afghanistan during the course of nearly two
years has numerous times turned to us with this request. In point of fact
one of these requests was sent to us on 26 December of this year. This is
equally known by us and by the Afghanistanian Government which
sent us these requests.
“I want to once more stress that the purpose of the limited Soviet
contingent in Afghanistan has only one goal—to provide assistance in
repulsing the acts of external aggression, which have been taking place
for a prolonged time and have now taken on even greater scale.
“It is absolutely impermissible, and not in conformance with actu-
ality, the claim (accusation), which appears in your message that the
Soviet Union allegedly did something to overthrow the Government of
Afghanistan. I must with all certainty stress that the change in the Af-
ghanistani Government was the result of the Afghanistanis themselves
and only by them. Ask the Afghanistani Government itself.
“Also not corresponding to reality is that which is said in your
message in relation to the fate of the families of the former leaders of
Afghanistan. We have at our disposal information contradicting the in-
formation you have received.
“I must further clearly state to you that the Soviet military contin-
gents did not take any military action against Afghanistan and we
clearly do not intend to do so.
“You have reproached us in your message that we did not consult
with the USA Government in reference to the Afghanistani matter be-
fore introducing our military contingents into Afghanistan. Permit us
to ask you—did you consult with us prior to beginning the massive
