162 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX over the other—all this would mean a defeat for the unity and independence of Lebanon as well as more violence, bloodshed and destruction. Thereupon, Syria assumed its national and brotherly responsibility towards Lebanon and sent units of its armed forces to stop fighting, restore peace, foil acts aiming at partition and maintain the unity and national safety of Lebanon. In this effort, Syria clashed with parties with whom we have political and emotional ties, including the Palestinians. The Syrian units made use of some of the means available to them to stop the fighting and to maintain the national balance in Lebanon, nothwithstanding the psychological effects produced on us by this use. But we regarded the interests of Lebanon and the restoration of peace to its territories more important than the suffering, burdens and losses we endured. Thus, fighting was stopped and peace was restored to all parts of Lebanon. 3. During the period of calm which followed, we tried to make the Lebanese Government play a more effective role in achieving national reconciliation and building up a national army which enjoys the confidence of all parties, because it is nationally constituted and because it owes allegiance only to the state and not to armed factions or to leaderships produced by the civil war. We did this in the belief that a country’s army should symbolize the national aspirations of its citizens as well as their desire for peace and stability. Unfortunately, however, no part of all this could be effected because the Falangists and the Chamounites placed obstacles in the way of the endeavors of the Lebanese Government to produce national reconcilation, commence a national dialogue, form a Council of Ministers embracing all parties, restore the institutions of the State and impose its authority in all Lebanese territories. In addition to rejecting the reconstruction of the Lebanese Army whose unity had been shattered by the civil war, they tied up the majority of its officers and military personnel with the “Military Council of the Lebanese Front” and thereby prevented the President of the Republic of Lebanon and his government from taking any effective measures related to the armed forces. They furthermore resorted to all means to achieve their aim—including threats of murder and terror—and did all this so that officers of the Army would serve them and would not serve the State of Lebanon. 4. During that period we displayed a measure of tolerance and flexibility beyond belief. We did this in the hope that time would persuade the deviating parties to go back to the right path and to restore to the central Government of Lebanon and authorities usurped by them. In fact they have been exerting authority to levy taxes, control education and public services and commit incredible acts of brutality against citizens in the areas over which they have imposed their authority. The Falangists and the Chamounites who performed these acts adopted
