National Security Policy 21 in meeting future milestones at the accelerated pace which is now programmed. During the year, ATLAS, THOR and JUPITER missiles were pro­ duced and underwent intensive captive and flight tests with gratifying results. In addition, significant events took place in the POLARIS devel­ opment and test schedule. CHART 1 Here you see the THOR program highlights for 1957. Among these were the first THOR launch, a maximum range demonstra­ tion of over 2400 nautical miles. This was a lightly loaded missile; a successful, all-­inertial guidance flight resulting in an impact within the target area. In 1957 ten THOR missiles were launched, four were completely successful, three attained partial test objectives, and three were unsuccessful. CHART 2 The JUPITER highlights are shown here. The outstanding point was the successful re-­entry test flight of the scale model of the JUPITER–C heat protected nose cone and its recovery at sea. The flight tests demon­ strating full range capability with missiles of greater weight than the tactical missiles; the inertial guidance system tests to target area; the full-­scale nose cone flight test; the first 150,000 pound thrust engine and the XW–35 warhead adaption kit tests. In 1957 seven JUPITER missiles were launched, three were completely successful and four were par­ tially successful. CHART 3 The development engineering inspection of THOR launch and ground support equipment took place at Douglas Aircraft Company in December 1957. This chart illustrates that ground support equipment comprises a large part of a ballistic missile system. In the foreground is a propellant servicing system and trailerized ground support equip­ ment can be seen in the background. THOR ground support equipment is in production. The missile and ground support equipment is air transportable. Contracts for JUPITER ground support equipment and operational missiles have been established and the engineering design review completed. Looking toward the deployment of the first squadrons of both THOR and JUPITER before the end of 1958, the Air Force has approved a deployment plan for the first IRBM squadron to the U.K. The JUPITER deployment plan must await detailed negotiations with NATO countries.
