198
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
peans and Americans conceive of higher standards for all people. In-
creasingly they are stirred by communist propaganda.
To the Persian of the lower classes any change is bound to be im-
provement, in his view. The peasant or the city worker is no worse off
than he was a hundred years ago, but today he feels that by some action
he might somehow improve his lot. This is the essential difference be-
tween the past and the present in Iran. It has been hard for many
western diplomats and oil company directors to believe that Iranians
could change. Haji Babal26 has seemed changeless, but the penetration
of new ideas and the propaganda of the communists is bringing change
and increasing discontent with existing conditions.
Mosadeq encourages feelings that Iran and Iranians can have a
better life. In his speeches about oil nationalization, he continually in-
sists that Iranians can change the ancient pattern of bare existence and
exploitation. As the leader and the voice of this discontent he gains
great political strength. At the same time he becomes vulnerable to ex-
tremists of both right and left. Whenever Mosadeq appears to halt or
moderate his headlong course he is denounced by communists and by
extreme nationalists. Popular dissatisfaction will break out if Mosadeq
fails to provide the benefits he promises. The tiger of social discontent
which he has loosed and now rides may eat him yet.
Desire for Leadership A great factor in Iran’s social discontent is the
desire of a confused people for a leader. Persia’s greatest periods of
prosperity and power have been under despotic rule. There is no tradi-
tion in Iran of democracy or of progressive action by an electorate. Al-
though they hated Reza Shah’s oppression, most Persians now refer to
those days longingly and say that Persia needs again a “strong man”.
Mosadeq has taken advantage of the bewilderment and anarchy
which existed in Iran in the ten years following the deposition of Reza
Shah. He has shown ability to lead and organize. Unlike his fellow poli-
ticians, he says exactly what he means to do. He gives a course to
follow, and he wins adherents as much because they seek a leader as
because they share his aspirations.
In a political situation of complete futility and confusion, the Na-
tional Front won great support because it offered leadership. The direc-
tion it pursued was almost less important than its dynamism in an at-
mosphere of weakness and of vacillation. It should not be forgotten,
therefore, that Mosadeq and his brand of nationalists can only be chal-
lenged by some equally dynamic leadership.
26 The typically Persian hero of Haji Babal of Isfahan. [Footnote is in the original.]
