380
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
that they would agree on no new contacts. However, it was not a
question of recognition for them. They will follow the lead of others
and not engage in any political contact at this time. They may go so
far as to recall their ambassador. They are prepared to make some
strong signal, but they do not want to close their mission.
The President then called Stuart Eizenstat and asked him to check
on the longshoremen embargo issue and report to the NSC as soon as
he possibly could.
The Deputy Secretary of State concluded by saying that we should
follow up on cancelling loans and on making no new loans by the
World Bank.
Turning to other bilateral measures, the Secretary of State said that
he would stonewall on Consular review talks. They were in recess and
would not be resumed.
The suggestion to reimpose the travel ban on Soviet New York
advance party personnel had been overtaken by events.
It was agreed that we should refuse and delay visas for official
Soviet visitors on a case-by-case basis. The Secretary of Defense specifi-
cally mentioned Gregory Arbatov in this connection.
On the question of reducing Soviet media representation in the
United States, Jody Powell said that he had a mixed reaction. He felt
that like diplomats we should go to the principle of equality but there
may, of course, be retaliation and we could end with no one in Moscow.
[2 lines not declassified] So on balance he felt we could run the risk. The
President approved.
Turning to the question of exchanges, there was a discussion of both
the scientific exchanges and the transfer of the magnetohydrodynamic
channel as well as certain meetings that had been scheduled. The
Secretary of State said that he would urge that Representative Bill
Green not take his congressional delegation to Moscow. Also, he would
propose cancelling the Joint Committee Meeting in Moscow to be
chaired by Hathaway and he would postpone the meeting of the Joint
Committee on Health scheduled for mid-February in Washington. On
the MHD channel, the Secretary said that transport of that piece of
equipment by C–5 aircraft to Moscow would have enormous publicity.
Dr. Brzezinski said we could defer that instead of cancelling it. Secretary
Brown noted that we had a lot of money invested into it, approximately
$10 million.
The Deputy Secretary of State said that they would review for
approval any proposed formal meetings between the Soviet officials
in the United States at the Assistant Secretary level or above. The
President approved review but said that he would be reluctant to
approve such contacts.
