January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981
1217
dividual subjects. First, he would like to get agreement on a list of sub-
jects for a Heads of Agreement. Second, he would try to fill in each of
the subjects. Third, he would try to sharpen up the issues within this
context. And fourth, he would try to resolve as many issues as possible.
Mr. Saunders suggested that we build an agreement cumulatively, as
in the peace treaty negotiations. It was agreed that the nature of the
issues do not lend themselves to “trade-offs” within an overall pack-
age, as opposed to a constant paring down of difficult issues. Mr.
Saunders suggested—and it was agreed—that a drafting group be set
up early, so that the delegations could be working from actual drafts
(e.g. on the Heads of Agreement) as they move along.
There was a lengthy discussion of the Gaza-first option. Secretary
Vance reported Peres’ view that the issues in Gaza are easier to resolve,
and that an agreement could attract significant support. Egypt can in-
fluence the Gazans, and this would be an achievement for Sadat. Peres
had also reported that King Hassan had spoken favorably of Gaza-first.
The Secretary also reported Ambassador Evron’s view that Begin
might be prepared in time to see the value in negotiating and imple-
menting Gaza-first, provided the precedent problem could be over-
come. Begin’s objection would be more to having an overall agreement
first, and then merely implementing Gaza-first.
Ambassador Linowitz said that we should try first to get a real
agreement for both the West Bank and Gaza. In this coming round of
talks, Egypt would not be ready to back off emphasis on a full agree-
ment, and Israel is not ready for Gaza-first. Secretary Vance suggested
overlapping the two efforts: building the list of powers to be trans-
ferred and tackling tough problems; and having the ability later to con-
vert the effort to a Gaza-first approach. Sadat could probably be deliv-
ered on Gaza-first. On the timing for talking about Gaza-first, Mr.
Saunders warned of the risks of introducing the idea too soon, because
this deflects concentration from a full agreement. At the same time, Sec-
retary Vance argued, the idea couldn’t just be dropped in at the end.
Also, with only about 16 days left after Ambassador Linowitz returns
on his second trip, there will not be much time to play with. It was
agreed that Ambassador Linowitz should use his best judgment—or
ask for guidance—on whether to introduce the Gaza-first approach be-
fore returning here at the end of this trip.
Secretary Vance said that we should think seriously of “sweet-
eners,” in terms of Israeli confidence-building measures on the West
Bank. Weizman’s credibility is already at stake on this issue. Having
these gestures—which needs to be sold to Begin—could be particularly
important with a Gaza-first solution. With regard to the U.S., the Secre-
tary said, there could be no “sweeteners” that cost money. Ambassador
