Arms Control and Disarmament 1241 296. Tabs A–E to Memorandum From Farley to John Foster Dulles (Print Document 142)1 Washington, March 18, 1958 Tab A NUCLEAR TEST SUSPENSION PROPOSED POLICY Nuclear tests to be suspended for a period of three years, begin­ ning January 1, 1959, or as soon thereafter as agreement is reached on the nature and location of control posts to monitor the agreement. The agreement would be automatically extended for an indefinite period at the end of the three years if agreement has been reached on the installa­ tion of a control system to ensure that no further fissionable material is produced for weapons purposes. If such agreement has not been reached, all states would be free to resume testing. The United States would, at the outset, declare its inten­ tion to resume nuclear weapons testing in these circumstances, but that all such testing would be conducted underground in order that no fur­ ther radioactive material be put in the atmosphere. DISCUSSION August 29 proposals—A 24-­month suspension of testing which would become indefinite when the cut-­off is in effect is provided for. However, this measure is conditional upon signing of a treaty covering all other elements of the proposals. Proposed position Although a test suspension after the next Pacific series would appear to be in our interests, since it would establish inspection posts behind the Iron Curtain, since it would tend to preserve the further lead in weapons technology we expect to achieve at HARDTACK, and since it would inhibit development of Nth power nuclear weapons capabili­ ties, this proposal should be cast in the terms set forth in the President’s 1958 State of the Union Message: “that we will always go the extra mile with anyone on earth if it will bring us nearer a genuine peace.” This proposal would prevent our being faced, in one or two years, with a UN resolution recommending cessation of tests supported by a majority of the membership, an eventuality which seems almost 1 Source: Nuclear test suspension; cut-­off of fissionable material production; estab­ lishment of surprise attack zones; preliminary measures relating to missile controls and outer space; reduction of manpower and conventional armaments. Secret. 9 pp. NARA, RG 59, Central Files, 700.5611/3–1858.
