March 27–December 31, 1979
827
real terms of over 9 percent), but important sectoral snags remain. It is
questionable how much improvement has trickled down to the lower
income levels. Housing and public services are woefully inadequate;
the urban fabric has been strained almost to the breaking point. Institu-
tional weaknesses and a lack of resources limit the government’s ability
to address these problems.
Sadat remains physically and psychologically isolated; officials
have difficulty in making and following through on decisions; and
most of those close to the President will not give him bad news. Never-
theless, Sadat is widely popular, while his opposition is fragmented
and without effective leadership. The Peace Treaty is backed by an
overwhelming majority, including the military. Mass media and labor
present no current challenge to the regime. Fundamentalist Muslim or-
ganizations oppose many governmental actions, including the Peace
Treaty, but they are bereft of real leadership and do not constitute a
present threat. The Soviets, opposing Sadat’s leadership and the peace
process, have few assets with which to work.
Continued stability depends greatly on the political and economic
momentum generated in the critical months ahead. If forward move-
ment is not maintained, destabilizing forces could present a threat to
Sadat’s regime. End summary.
2. In the charged atmosphere following the conclusion of the
Egyptian-Israeli Peace Treaty, the threat of Sadat’s sudden removal
from office by assassination has been heightened. Syria, Iraq, Libya,
and the PLO, even Jordan, have as a primary objective the overthrow of
Sadat. While Sadat’s security is good, and the Egyptians are aware of
the threat, we cannot rule out the possibility of a successful assassina-
tion attempt. Such an event could well be destabilizing, the more so
since there is no established and automatic successor of Sadat’s stature.
Assassination could polarize the country—those who would react in
rage and unify behind a temporary successor (probably Mubarak) and
those who would seek safety in return to the Arab fold. Much would
depend upon the wishes of the military leadership. Over the longer
term, it is hard to imagine any successor to Sadat having the fortitude,
vision, tactical flexibility and political base to persist for long in a policy
opposed by the rest of the Arab world.
3. The following assessment is based on the assumption that Sadat
will continue in office, at least until his current term expires in 1982.
Should he then decide to transfer power to Mubarak, we assume the
process would go smoothly. Nevertheless, even with Sadat in office,
the Egyptian system is subject to a number of strains which have the
potential to destabilize the situation. These are outlined below.
4. Egyptian vulnerability to destabilizing forces was best demon-
strated by the January 1977 subsidy riots which severely shook this
