330  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
by keeping silent we—­or I—­are going to avoid controversy; in addi-
tion to the wildly inaccurate items which have appeared in America and 
been reprinted in El Catolicismo, the Consul in Medellin has just tele-
phoned to say a vicious personal attack has appeared in El Heraldo, the 
church paper in that city, and another malicious article has appeared in 
Manizales.
In considering this entire question, we must remember that 
there is a strong current of anti-­clericalism in the Liberal Party. The 
Protestants originally entered Colombia a century ago at the invitation 
of the Government and there are many Colombians who, while devout 
Catholics, are less than impressed with the Church’s arrogance in mat-
ters which should not properly concern it. The possibility of defying the 
Church in matters beyond its proper competence was vividly illustrated 
in the March congressional elections when the Laurcanitstas won an 
overwhelming victory in the Conservative Party despite the fulmina-
tions of the Catholic hierarchy. It would, of course, be impossible for us 
to get the Protestant case before the Colombian people to the extent that 
Laureano Gomez got his before them, but nevertheless I suspect that the 
Catholic Church in Colombia might be rather unhappy to be smoked out 
in all its fanaticism if, by making no more than reasonable concessions, it 
could have peace. It is, in my opinion, precisely the fear which exists that 
our objectives may be far more ambitious than they appear which has 
induced the Catholic Church and the Colombian Government to take the 
firm stand they have.
4. What may we expect of the future Colombian Government?
Dr. Lleras Camargo, the President-­elect, is a devout Catholic. He is 
also an able, broad-­minded Liberal. I have little doubt that he appreci-
ates that the Protestants have not been fairly treated in Colombia and 
that he deplores this. At the same time, it seems to me that, even if he 
were far hotter under the collar regarding the treatment of Protestants 
than I have any reason to believe he is, he would still be most reluctant 
to take any vigorous action in the religious question. He has inherited 
a virtually bankrupt government, a frightful situation of widespread 
violence in the countryside, a country exhausted by ten years of bitter 
partisan strife. His obvious desire is to heal the wounds of the past ten 
years and restore the country’s unity and prosperity. He must work 
in harness with his Conservative allies and can accomplish nothing 
without them. Under these circumstances, are we to suppose that he 
is going to stir up a bitter controversy to meet our representations? He 
realizes, of course, that he must have our support in many matters, but 
he also realizes that, given the alternatives, we have practically no choice other 
than to give him that support. The proof of the pudding is the loan which 
we have given Colombia following his election, and the way in which it 
was given. I do not mean in any sense to criticize this loan; I merely use
