382
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
there to be any progress, Nier stated, we should not have proposals
merely turned down with no counterproposals. “If the US side has
any proposals of its own, we are prepared to consider them.”5 Claims—
Nier began by noting that it was not the GDR’s fault that it had taken
30 years from the end of WWII to begin discussing these problems. The
GDR experts had considered this matter, he continued, and Professor
Kleier, the Chief of the Office for the Protection of Property, is prepared
to continue the talks with US experts at the end of January or the
beginning of February 1979. Culture—Nier stated that cultural relations
between the US and GDR had developed favorably. Ms. Derian noted
the beauty of the Dresden exhibit. Nier replied that the GDR could not
send such an exhibit each year but was pleased at the good reception
the exhibit had had. Nier noted that the Ambassador had made several
suggestions for cultural activities. He agreed to the performances of
the Jubilee Singers for May 1979 and also at the Dresden Music Festival
and in Karl Marx Stadt. He said preparation was underway for the
exhibition of “Reflections USA” in Leipzig in the fall of 1979 and that
they would view “positively” having “Reflections” exhibited at the TV
Tower in Berlin in 1980 but that they needed detailed proposals. In
conclusion, he said that there are new possibilities for developing
relations between the GDR and the US.
16. The Ambassador stated that the presence of Asst Sec Derian
was an indication of our interest in developing better understanding
and cooperation with the GDR in a bilateral and in a CSCE context.
He stated that such consultations can lead to better understanding,
point up problems, identify common interest which can contribute
to bilateral cooperation, peace and security. Ambassador expressed
appreciation for the responses to questions he had raised with Foreign
Minister Fischer. He noted in particular the offer of cooperation in
narcotics control, the importance of this issue had been highlighted by
the fact that the President had raised it during the presentation of
credentials of Ambassador Grunert. We are pleased about GDR willing-
ness to receive Congressman English as this could contribute to solving
the drug problem and to development of bilateral relations as well.
On the Consular Convention question, the Ambassador acknowledged
that this is one of the unresolved issues impeding the normalization
5 Meeting with East German officials in East Berlin on June 16, Woessner stressed that
including a definition of nationality in the Consular Convention “caused us difficulties
not only in and of itself, but also because of the question it raised concerning Berlin.”
The East Germans responded that a Consular Convention could only be signed when
“both parties recognized that both have citizens and could represent their interests.”
(National Archives, RG 59, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Office of Analysis for
the Commonwealth and Eastern Europe, Lot 92D404, Office Subject Files, 1967–1985,
Box 8, GDR–US (Political) 1977–1978)
