International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1979 clear power and to support his call for an International Atomic Energy Agency study9 of nuclear safety. We talked of the need for increased investment in the development of alternative energy resources; all felt that agreement on specific actions to this end is crucial to success of the Summit. This hinges on our being able to submit specific US ideas so that the Summit Preparatory Group can prepare a range of options for the heads of government to review.10 It’s sad others don’t have ideas, but it’s a fact. (C) 2. Macro-Economic. Having gone as far as they can in containing inflation through restraining demand, it was agreed that the Summit countries should emphasize longer-term structural policies to increase production at Tokyo—e.g., tax incentives, deregulation, and reducing the size of the public sector. Charlie Schultze argued persuasively that this should be the new front in our battle on inflation. Thatcher, Barre, and Schmidt will like this.11 (C) 3. North-South. We discussed, as you and Ohira did, the need for Summit agreement on steps to help LDCs increase their food and energy output. To this end, we focussed on increased cooperation with LDCs in research and development, which has the advantage of being both useful and cheap.12 (C) 4. Conclusion. This Summit will differ from its two predecessors, in that it will focus largely on a single set of issues: energy and macroeconomics. If we can give substantive content to this approach, the Tokyo Summit could be helpful in dramatizing the fact that we have clear programs for dealing with these problems. But this requires Summit agreement on new and common initiatives, rather than bargaining about commitment to familiar and contrasting national actions, as at Bonn. This kind of Summit is harder to prepare and more uncertain of success. But it is inherent in the situation: We face a new challenge, as a result of interacting energy and inflation threats, and this type of Summit is needed to deal with them.13 (C) 9 Carter underlined the phrase “International Atomic Energy Agency study” and wrote “We have the INFCE ongoing” in the adjacent margin. 10 Carter drew an arrow pointing toward this sentence and the previous one and wrote “ok” in the adjacent margin. Owen subsequently gained Carter’s approval of a U.S. proposal for an International Energy Technology Group; see Foreign Relations, 1969–1976,
