540 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement during the course of their discussions of practical matters at issue between the two sides make the following declarations: “2. Ambassador Wang Ping-nan, on behalf of the Government of the People’s Republic of China, declares that the PRC will refrain from the threat or use of force except in self-defense; and “3. In accordance with the principles of the United Nations Charter and generally accepted standards of international conduct, the PRC will always seek the solution by peaceful means of any dispute to which it is a party and the continuation of which is likely to endanger the mainte­ nance of international peace and security; and “4. Recognizing the particular importance of relaxing and elimi­ nating tension in the Taiwan area, the PRC declares that the foregoing general principles are specifically applicable to that area. “5. Ambassador U. Alexis Johnson, on behalf etc.” D. While foregoing is drafted as PRC section, we would of course put our section in identical terms first. Gowen Note: Mr. Waddell (FE) notified 11/23/55, 5:55 pm, EH. 386. Letter 18 from Johnson to McConaughy1 Letter No. 18 Geneva, November 23, 1955 Dear Walter: This is just a very brief note as I have said just about everything I have to say in the telegrams I am sending off today. Thanks for your letter of November 18. As you can see from my report of today’s meeting, the corner on renunciation of force is, as you foresaw, getting tighter and some decisions are going to be required before my next meeting. What I am principally writing about is the entire question of what I suppose might be termed my administrative support. I am very dis­ turbed at the amount of time and energy it is necessary for both of us to devote to this. If these talks are in fact as important as we believe 1 Source: Department of State, Geneva Talks Files, Lot 72D415. Secret; Official–­ Informal. The original is signed “Alex” in an unknown hand. A handwritten note in the same hand reads: “Amb Johnson just had time to dicate this but not to sign it before catching his train to Zurich.”
