Afghanistan
237
85.
Memorandum From the Director of the Strategic Warning
Staff, Central Intelligence Agency (MacEachin) to the
National Intelligence Officer for Warning, Central
Intelligence Agency (Lehman)1
S–0086/SWS
Washington, December 13, 1979
SUBJECT
Soviet Actions in Afghanistan
1. I left the meeting on Afghanistan yesterday with the feeling
that we had not accomplished much in the way of sharpening the
Community perception of what the Soviets may be about in Afghani-
stan.2 Other than myself, most of those present seemed to continue to
hold the view that the Soviets are moving tentatively with regard to
their options in Afghanistan. E.g.,
—They are setting up an enclave at Bagram to ensure that they
have a base through which to either evacuate their advisors or insert
more troops and material, whichever move is dictated by the evolution
of a situation which is now uncertain.
—They have decided to bolster the defenses of Bagram in response
to increased insurgent probes.
—They need some troops to protect their people against a massacre
if the situation suddenly deteriorates.
—Etc.
2. None of these actions, however, is likely to change the course
of events in Afghanistan that is causing the Soviets grief. Yet there
seemed to be a glimmer of consensus among those at the meeting that
the act of sending their own combat units into another country in the
midst of an insurgency reflects a significant political decision on the
part of the Soviets. Why then should we shrink from believing that
the Soviets—having crossed this threshold—will employ these troops
in some way to tangibly impact on the situation that caused the thresh-
old to be crossed.
3. The decision in this case was made with the benefit of a thorough
(60 plus days) on-the-scene study of all aspects of the situation by a
mission of high level authorities. (The Pavlovskiy mission.)3 We know
from the composition of the study group and the activities in which
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, National Intelligence Council Files, Job
93T01324R, Box 4, Afghanistan. Secret.
2 The meeting was not further identified and no record of it was found.
3 See footnote 3, Document 62.
