858 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI B) Retransfer:3 U.S. consent required for retransfer of foreign fuel irradiated in all U.S.-supplied (including previously supplied) reactors. C) Full-Scope Safeguards: That the recipient be required to place all its nuclear facilities and materials under IAEA safeguards. We can anticipate significant difficulty in negotiating U.S. rights of approval over reprocessing and disposition of U.S.-supplied nuclear fuel or foreign fuel irradiated in U.S. reactors. Many countries view U.S. control of their fuel as infringement on their sovereignty and their rights to recover the residual fuel value in the spent fuel. In addition, with countries not party to the NPT, our greatest difficulty will be in attempting to negotiate a full-scope safeguards provision requiring that such recipients place all their nuclear facilities and materials under safeguards of the International Atomic Energy. This includes such countries as Spain, Brazil, Egypt, Israel, Turkey, South Africa, India and a number of Arab countries. Issue C: Full-Scope Safeguards Traditionally, safeguards have been required by a supplier only on nuclear material and equipment it supplies, although the 99 nonnuclear weapon states party to the NPT have agreed to accept safeguards on all their peaceful nuclear activities. Only Canada and Sweden have gone beyond this in adopting the policy of insisting on full-scope safeguards in new nuclear agreements. While the UK, USSR, and others urge this as a common supplier policy, they have heretofore been unwilling to adopt it unless all suppliers agree. In the past, the French have specifically resisted agreeing to such a safeguards requirement, arguing that it would put them in the position of requiring of non-nuclear weapon states defacto NPT adherence, a position they continue to reject as a matter of principle. All Agencies agree that we should favor a “full-scope safeguards” policy. Agencies differ, on both the form of the full-scope safeguard commitment that should be required and whether deviations should be tolerated in exceptional circumstances. In your San Diego speech of September 25,4 you said that the U.S. should make no new commitments for the sale of nuclear technology or fuel to countries which refuse to forego nuclear explosives and to place their nuclear facilities under IAEA safeguards. There is a range of formulations consistent with your San Diego statement. For example, at British initiative, and with non-NPT parties in mind, the IAEA has drafted a model NPT-type agreement under which a recipient would undertake, for a period of 25 years, to place all nuclear facilities and 3 Consent for US-supplied fuel is already required. [Footnote is in the original.] 4 See footnote 6, Document 325.
