agricultural lands by Asiatics is regarded as a menace in some parts of the United States and that land laws have been framed by some states designed to cope with this situation. He anticipated this point. I did not have even to hint at it. I think he regards the number of Austrian nationals likely to seek to lease land in the United States for agricultural purposes as negligible. This does not worry him. On the other hand, he does not understand why the United States cannot safely incorporate in the treaty a provision granting a most favored nation right to own real property and perhaps lease it for agricultural purposes. He seemed to proceed on the theory that as the United States had not conferred upon the nationals of any country by treaty the right to own real property and lease it for agricultural purposes, we could not be embarrassed. The recognition of favored nation treatment in this respect would therefore be an empty one but it would satisfy the Austrian Government. I did not feel at liberty at this stage, in view of the confidential nature of my instructions in this particular, to explain to him the embarrassment arising out of Article IX of the Treaty of 1853 with the Argentine Republic. Dr. Schüller seemed quite concerned about the privileges of Austrian nationals to acquire land in the United States and seemed anxious lest they should be put in some relatively unfavorable position. He also seemed to think that it was in the interest of the United States as well to have some concrete understanding in view of the state of the Austrian law which makes the right of nationals of foreign countries to own land in Austria conditional upon the reciprocal right of Austrian nationals to own land in the country of the foreign national concerned. I finally read to him the third clause of the three paragraphs I was authorized to propose, as set forth on page 6 of Department instruction 459, to wit.: “As regards the acquisition, possession, and disposition of immovable property, except as regards the leasing of lands for specified purposes provided for in the foregoing paragraph, the nationals of each of the High Contracting Parties shall enjoy in the territory of the other, subject to reciprocity, the treatment generally accorded to foreigners by the laws of the place where the property is situated.” The first impression was that this clause might prove troublesome. He was inclined to question the construction that might be placed upon the phrase
