Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission 685 including the parliamentary and political leaders, Brandt, Wehner and others, so we were nine or ten people altogether talking about Iran, and all the other subjects I have mentioned; and I am glad to tell you that we were very united in the opinion which we at the end articulated and I would just like to mention them now to you one after the other. I have also the opportunity tonight, within the next quarter of an hour, to go over to Parliament to talk to the Foreign Relations Committee in a private session to tell them what is in the making. First, Iran. As you know from early January, we are still not really convinced that extending economic sanctions will help to liberate the hostages, but we will certainly follow through. We are determined to take that decision next week in our Cabinet. President: Yes, I am not sure either. There is no way to be sure. Schmidt: I think it opens up two dangerous possibilities: one danger is that they fall back on the Soviet Union which they will not like, but they may feel they may be forced to and secondly, if sanctions don’t work, then in a couple of weeks, we have to come to the point where we have to ask for other measures. President: Yes. Schmidt: Anyway, we will participate. Valery will participate. I guess we’ll get a consensus with the EC Foreign Secretaries on Monday or Tuesday next week.6 They are sitting together Monday or Tuesday; we will try to form a so-called European umbrella for the Nine governments to act on a national basis. Possibly, we might also act by a joint decision. The Rome Treaty has some clause, the famous article 113 which may be useful as an end.7 Anyway, I guess you will see in the course of next week some European Cabinets, at least, anyway my Cabinet to publicly decide that we take economic sanctions. They would be declared next Wednesday, but probably becoming effective a fortnight after the election of the Parliament, if within that fortnight the hostages are not freed. This would mean about the date which you mentioned five minutes ago. President: Well, you know, we have indications that it is very doubtful that the Parliament is going to be elected at all. And the date that I mentioned was really either mid-May or two weeks after the Majles . . . 6 April 22 and 23. In an April 22 meeting in Luxembourg, the EC–9 Foreign Ministers voted to impose sanctions on Iran on May 17 unless “decisive progress” was made on freeing the hostages. (R.W. Apple, Jr., “Allies Set To Impose Economic Sanctions on Teheran May 17,” New York Times, April 23, 1980, p. A1) 7 Under Article 113 of the 1957 Rome Treaty, the European Community took the responsibility for negotiating common commercial policies with the rest of the world.
