3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 January–May 1980 749 261. Letter From Soviet Foreign Minister Gromyko to Secretary of State Vance1 February 16, 1980 Dear Mr. Secretary, Having read your letter of February 82 I would like to tell you frankly the following. One could only welcome the recognition in the letter of the crucial importance of relations between our countries for the general world situation and the apparent desire to search for ways of overcoming the serious situation prevailing now in these relations. However, the attempt to evade consideration of the real causes complicating the international situation, efforts to reduce the whole matter to the recent developments in Afghanistan depicted, for that matter, in a completely distorted light, and the raising of various kinds of other far-fetched questions—all this in no way demonstrates a real intention to rectify the current situation. Indeed, it is impossible, without sinning against the truth, to dispute the fact that the exacerbation of the international situation by no means began at the end of last December, but rather much earlier. We also pointed out to the US side the reasons for this exacerbation much earlier. Among these is the decision on deployment in the US of the MX mobile ICBM system3 which was made almost immediately after the SALT–II Treaty was signed in Vienna. There is also the artificially created “mini-crisis” on the question of a “Soviet brigade” in Cuba. There is also the urgent establishment of the “Rapid Deployment Force” designed for armed intervention in various parts of the world. There is the long-range program of permanent defense spending increases and arms build-up imposed by the US on its NATO allies. 1 Source: Carter Library, Plains File, President’s Personal Foreign Affairs File, Box 5, USSR (General): 9/77–12/80. Secret. The initial “C” is written in the top right corner of the letter, indicating that Carter saw it. Printed from the U.S. translation. 2 See Document 260. 3 For more information on the MX missile decision, see Congress and the Nation, vol. V, 1977–1980, pp. 156–158.
