982  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
196.	 Memorandum of Conversation1
Washington, January 28, 1991, 9:10–11 a.m.
PARTICIPANTS
US:	
The Secretary
	
	
Dennis B. Ross (Notetaker)
USSR:	 Soviet Foreign Minister Bessmertnykh
	
	
P. Palazhenko (Notetaker)
[Omitted here are discussions not related to START.]
Baker: Well, should we go to arms control now. I’d like us to get 
back to the Houston agreement. Should we have Reggie and Obukhov 
come in and report to us where they are.
Bessmertnykh: You have introduced some new elements that were 
not in Houston.
Baker: We worry that if things come apart in the Soviet Union, we 
will lose START. Therefore, my feeling is let’s get this done before the 
political environment changes so that either it becomes difficult for 
you to conclude it or for us to ratify. So why don’t we try to do this 
before February 11 whether there’s a Summit or not.
Bessmertnykh: I agree totally, let’s get it done. Don’t overstate the 
difficulties in START and the Summit postponement.
Baker: How should we deal with signing START?
Bessmertnykh: Well, we could have the meeting, it doesn’t have to 
be a full-­fledged summit, we could have the leaders sign it there.
[Omitted here is discussion not related to START.]
Baker: I think it is a good idea to have Reggie and Obukhov tell us 
where they are. Whether there is a difference, or whether we’re back at 
Houston or not, let’s hear it.
Bessmertnykh: I’ve got some ideas on B–1 and B–2 which I will pres-
ent tomorrow. So let’s hear a summary.
Bartholomew: Let me give you my script that’s really based on the 
letter the Secretary sent to Eduard Shevardnadze2 and his response.3 
Based on that, we don’t have closure on the B–2 question at this point. 
I’ll tell you what I’ve told Obukov that we’ve been ready to go beyond 
1 Source: Department of State, Office of the Executive Secretariat, Lot 96D277, 
Baker Subject Files 1990–1994, No Folder Title. Secret; Nodis. The meeting took place in 
Secretary Baker’s office at the Department of State. The full memorandum of conversa-
tion is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, vol. III, Soviet Union, 
Russia, and Post-Soviet States: High-Level Contacts.
2 See Document 185.
3 See Document 190.
