National Security Policy  777
but this increase would be insignificant in comparison to opposing 
Soviet Bloc forces, and would still be far below the requirement for 
meeting either a Soviet non-­nuclear challenge, or limited nuclear chal­
lenge, in Europe, in the Far East and in the Middle East.
8. In summary, the net effect of the revisions in the Basic National 
Security Policy which have been suggested, if actually implemented, 
would be as follows:
One: Due to the fear of use of nuclear weapons on the part of some 
elements of the Government, political restrictions on their use would 
be imposed which would reduce to an unacceptable level the combat 
capability of our tactical forces, land, sea and air.
Two: Our strategic nuclear capability would decline to relative 
impotency in the matter of a few years.
Three: The only alternative to these consequences would be a vastly 
increased budget and personnel ceiling.
9. In my judgment, we should not tamper with the present word­
ing in the military section of the paper. There has been no change in 
our basic policy of containment and deterrence, and there has been no 
change in our defense funding policy. The present military section of 
NSC 5810/1 provides adequate guidance for the development of prop­
erly balanced military forces, establishes a reasonable policy for the use 
of nuclear weapons, and should not be changed.
177.	 Briefing Note for July 9 NSC Meeting1
Washington, July 8, 1959
Basic National Security Policy (NSC 5906)
Today we resume consideration of Basic National Security Policy 
(NSC 5906) by taking up the military section, which begins with para­
graph 10.
One thing which has given me concern is that nowhere in these 
paragraphs do we refer specifically to control of the seas, although we 
do talk about our retaliatory power; general war; local aggression; and 
continental defense.
1 Source: NSC 5906, basic national security policy. Top Secret. 5 pp. Eisenhower 
Library, Whitman File, NSC Records.
