Negotiating Channels
435
The next move of the religious right was to try to manipulate the
elections in their way. Khomeini, whom B described as a master political
leader, had again thwarted the hard-liners by eliminating their candi-
date, Farsi, as well as the candidate of the extreme left, Rajavi. The
students had then eliminated Admiral Madani. That left two candidates
trusted by Khomeini in the field, Bani Sadr and Habibi. B, who knew
all of the Iranian revolutionaries in Paris, had the highest regard for
Habibi. He described him as very solid, a man of principle, culture,
moderation and dedication—a man without enemies and probably
Khomeini’s favorite. Because the religious right had lost their candidate
they were forced to back Habibi. That assured him a victory but would
not make him beholden to them. It was Khomeini’s plan to take the
position of “religious guide,” dealing only with general policy ques-
tions and leaving the details of running the country to the President.
B anticipated that the next stage of the struggle for power after the
Presidential election would be a fight between the religious right and
the secularists for the control of the Majlis and the Prime Ministry and
cabinet positions.
In an aside B described how Habibi had been the principal author
of the draft constitution which Khomeini had accepted. Later Khomeini
agreed to submit the draft to a constitutional assembly when Bazargan
demanded that as part of the democratic process. As Khomeini feared,
the religious right dominated the assembly and redrafted key articles
of the constitution to their liking—seeking to impose the theocracy
which Khomeini did not want.
The scenario for ending the hostage crisis which Ghotbzadeh and
possibly the Revolutionary Council appeared to have worked out with
B and V follows:
Waldheim acting on his own authority will appoint a commission
of inquiry, chaired by someone like Sean McBride. The U.S. will oppose
the commission on technical grounds. Our opposition is essential, if
the commission is to be accepted in Iran, particularly by the militants.
The commission will have as its purposes the inquiry into Iranian
grievances and, secondly, into the conditions of the hostages. After a
week’s investigation the commission will report its findings to the
Iranian government. The findings concerning the hostages will describe
their inhumane treatment and the commission will recommend the
hostages be released. This part of the report will be transmitted to
Khomeini who will recognize that, although the taking of hostages
was an acceptable form of pressure on the United States by Iran, the
conditions under which the hostages are held are not acceptable in
terms of Islamic standards. Khomeini will then order the hostages
released to the Iranian government which may remove them to a prison.
V believes it essential that there be an intermediate stage in which the
