1128 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement 271. Memorandum of Discussion at the 463d NSC Meeting1 Washington, October 13, 1960 SUBJECT Discussion at the 463rd Meeting of the National Security Council, Thursday, ­October 13, 1960 Present at the 463rd NSC Meeting were the President of the United States, presiding; the Secretary of State; the Secretary of Defense; and the Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization. Also present at the Meeting and participating in the Council actions below were the Secretary of the Treasury; the Attorney General, and the Director, Bureau of the Budget. Also attending the Meeting were the Chairmen, Interdepartmental Intelligence Conference and the Interdepartmental Committee on Internal Security (Item 1); Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff; the Director of Central Intelligence; the Under Secretary of State (Dillon); The Assistant to the President; the Special Assistants to the President for Security Operations Coordination (also acting for the Special Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs), for Foreign Economic Policy, and for Science & Technology; Assistant Secretary of State Gerard C. Smith; Mr. Haydn Williams, Department of Defense; the Acting NSC Representative on Internal Security (Ash); The White House Staff Secretary; the Assistant White House Staff Secretary; the Acting Executive Secretary, NSC (Boggs); and Mr. Robert Johnson, Director, NSC Secretariat. There follows a summary of the discussion at the Meeting and main points taken. 1. STATUS OF NATIONAL SECURITY PROGRAMS ON JUNE 30, 1960 (NSC 6013) Mr. Harr introduced Mr. Ash who summarized the report. (A copy of Mr. Ash’s Briefing Note and a copy of his presentation are filed in the Minutes of the Meeting and other copies are also attached to this Memorandum). Following Mr. Ash’s presentation, the President asked whether, if we develop a machine which will indicate the introduction of nuclear materials and we find that the Soviets are introducing such materials, we should break relations with them. Secretary Herter responded that this would be about as serious an aggravation as one could think of. 1 Source: Agenda item 1: Status of National Security Programs on June 30, 1960. Top Secret. Extracts—6 pp. Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, NSC Records.
