Afghanistan 147 country. This was made clear to the Soviet Government in repeated U.S. public statements and in a private démarche delivered by our Embassy to the Foreign Ministry in Moscow.3 —At the same time, the United States has made clear that we categorically reject the baseless allegations made by Soviet media of U.S. involvement in Afghanistan’s internal affairs. —Despite this, accusations continue to appear in Soviet media. Given similar statements by high Soviet officials we assume these media reports are inspired by the Soviet Government. —One particularly objectionable example was the April 10 Pravda article by one A. Petrov. This article makes unfounded allegations against Deputy Secretary Warren Christopher and purports to give the names of U.S. experts in subversive activity. —These reports that the United States is responsible for anti-government activity by various Afghan groups are completely false and do not serve the interests of U.S.-Soviet relations or stability in an unsettled area of the world. —Our two countries can surely agree that the present period is characterized by various tensions and instability in South Asia and the Persian Gulf. Our respective interests should be directed toward insuring peace and stability in these troubled regions, and we believe that an important step in this direction is the avoidance of provocative recriminations and unfounded allegations of outside interference. —Continued untrue accusations of involvement of the United States can affect the safety of American citizens in Afghanistan. Moreover, steps which inflame regional tensions can lead governments of the region to call for greater involvement of both our countries, a development which would make the instability of the area more dangerous to international peace and security. Vance 3 Instructions and talking points for the démarche were sent in telegram 69537 to Moscow, March 21. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P840148– 2586) The Embassy delivered the démarche the same day. (Telegram 6958 from Moscow, March 21; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P840148–2589) The Department issued public statements denying involvement in Afghanistan on March 23 and April 2. (Stuart Auerbach, “U.S. Cautions Soviets on Interfering in Afghanistan,” Washington Post, March 24, 1979, p. A12; and Don Oberdorfer, “U.S. Blasts ‘Baseless’ Soviet Charges,” Washington Post, April 3, 1979, p. A12)
