514  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
production as a Western attempt to condemn them to a permanent 
position of inferiority. Finally, the USSR does not as yet seem to regard 
itself as under any compulsion to reach an early agreement, since it sees 
that other factors are already leading to some degree of Western disar­
mament. It is also probably confident that growing Soviet capabilities 
and the pressure of world public opinion will eventually induce the 
Western powers to settle for less in the way of controls and inspection 
than they presently demand.
217. Soviet Policy in the UN. The Soviet leaders regard the UN and 
its various organs and specialized agencies as important forums for 
their “co-­existence” policy in all its aspects. They have evinced grow­
ing awareness that when acting jointly with the Asian-African bloc, the 
Soviet bloc can frustrate Western policies or proposals, and they may 
even hope for UN endorsement of Soviet policies on certain issues. We 
believe that in the period of this estimate the USSR will seek to exploit 
the possibilities inherent in this situation and to this end will main­
tain and probably increase its activities in the UN and the specialized 
agencies.
Soviet Policy in Particular Areas
218. The Middle East. The USSR clearly regards the chief immediate 
prospects for expanding its influence as lying in the Middle East. The 
events of the past two years—­the growing estrangement from the West 
of Egypt, Syria, and Yemen, and the Anglo-French invasion at Suez—­
have almost certainly appeared to the USSR as offering further oppor­
tunities for substantial gain.
219. We consider that the USSR’s aims in the Middle East are to 
eliminate Western bases and influence, to attain a position from which 
it could deny oil to the West, and ultimately to establish dominance in 
the area. The USSR is shrewdly supporting Arab nationalism against 
the West and is carefully avoiding an appearance of seeking undue 
political influence of its own; it is careful of Arab sensibilities and is 
soft-­pedaling subversive activities aimed at promoting Communist 
regimes. Thus the short run Soviet emphasis will be on promoting neu­
tralism and undermining the position of the West. The USSR will prob­
ably attempt to bring the Arab states gradually within the Soviet sphere 
of influence, but it is unlikely, over the next few years at least, to install 
Communist regimes.
220. The USSR appears to be carrying out a flexible and oppor­
tunistic policy of limited risk in the Middle East. It can be relied on to 
continue its attempts to capitalize on such disruptive forces in the area 
as Nasser’s ambitions for Arab hegemony, Yemeni designs on the Aden 
Protectorate, the leftist coup in Syria, and the Arab-Israeli conflict, on 
which it is taking an increasingly pro-Arab position. It will provide
