1980  823
telecommunications and information vulnerability surveys in the Fed-
eral civil sector and had three more in progress. Each survey performed 
by NTIA documents specific findings and offers NTIA’s recommenda-
tions for corrective action. The eight survey projects involved a range of 
Federal civil governmental activities including agencies specializing in 
socioeconomic matters, transportation, scientific matters, law enforce-
ment, a regulatory agency, and an organization involved with national 
financial activities. Each was an in-­depth study of agency telecommuni-
cations resources and included interviews with operations, telecommu-
nications, and management personnel. Agencies who have participated 
in this project have given NTIA “high marks” for their thoroughness, 
professionalism and excellence of the survey findings and recommen-
dations. (U)
PROGRAM OVERVIEW
DUCKPINS continues to be our most potent countermeasure with 
a limited in-­place bulk encryption effort trailing behind. NSA’s bulk 
protection technology development progresses slowly due to a variety 
of national network problems which must be overcome. Lack of secure 
voice terminals continues to hamper fulfilling our end-­to-­end voice 
security and protection requirements. Overall progress toward imple-
menting “fixes” to deny the Soviets information or access to informa-
tion has been undeniably slow. This has been due in part to technology 
problems and in part to an inability to identify information requiring 
protection. (S)
As previously reported the difficulty of defining or accurately 
determining what unclassified information is, or may be useful to a for-
eign adversary or whether it is, or is not national security related con-
tinues to plague us and obscure executive agent responsibilities. This 
situation is further compounded by the recognition that classes and 
categories of information can be, and in many instances, are “moving 
targets.” That is, information can rapidly gravitate from one category 
to another for a host of reasons depending upon national or interna-
tional conditions. One thing is clear, however, only the originator of the 
information operating within departmental guidelines can legitimately 
decide whether his or her information should be protected from inter-
ception while in transmission. (U)
The briefing programs by both Executive Agents are notewor-
thy and continued without abatement. Similarly the information 
vulnerability studies being done by the NTIA have been extremely 
successful. All department and agencies should avail themselves of 
this service. (U)
After discussions with the Director, NSA and Administrator, NTIA, 
an Implementation Decision Paper was issued in late 1979 in an attempt
