Human Rights
289
—IO, our missions in New York and Geneva, our mission to the
OAS and HA have been working together to strengthen the interna-
tional institutional framework.
—The President’s signature of the two human rights covenants
was a major step forward.
STATUS REPORT
1. Communication of Policy to all Posts
A. The Deputy Secretary’s ABA speech was dispatched to all
posts.3
B. In trips by you, the Deputy Secretary, Ambassador Young, As-
sistant Secretaries Todman, Maynes, Moose, Holbrooke, and myself,
the human rights policy has been communicated in the countries vis-
ited. We have begun a series of airgrams to all diplomatic posts trans-
mitting information about the recognized non-governmental organiza-
tions in the human rights field.
C. A packet of materials has been prepared for distribution which
provides an up-date on current human rights legislation; a special Li-
brary of Congress study on the status of international human rights
agreements; and a USIA set of human rights documents.
D. Human Rights officers have attended regional consular officer
conferences in Latin America and Africa.
E. HA has been meeting with Ambassadors and political officers
and DCM’s while they are in the Department, on a regular basis.
2. Actions with Respect to Individual Countries
A. Initial drafts of the country evaluation papers from the geo-
graphic bureaus have been received and reviewed. Final versions of the
classified country evaluation papers and the unclassified report on
human rights conditions for submission for the Congress are being pre-
pared for submission to me by November 22 and to the Deputy Secre-
tary by December 15.
B. Particularly in Latin America, the recent trips by Department
spokespersons have produced greater awareness of the Administra-
tion’s policy and varied forms of response: Ambassador Young’s trip
(accompanied by the Deputy Assistant Secretary for Human Rights,
Deputy Assistant Secretary for Latin America and Assistant Adminis-
trator for AID) resulted in agreement to sign the American Convention
of Human Rights in the Dominican Republic, Haiti and Barbados.4
3 See footnote 6, Document 74.
4 An August 19 synopsis of Young’s trip, prepared by Schneider, is in the National
Archives, RG 59, Bureau of Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs, Chron and Official
Records of the Assistant Secretary for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs, Lot
85D366, Interviews/Bios.
