614
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
timated the time and manpower that would be needed even for this
limited objective. Originally, Moscow may have hoped that 40,000 to
60,000 Soviet troops would be enough; present force configurations
would seem to indicate that the Soviets now believe that it will need
at least double that number, and that the Soviet, rather than the Afghan,
army will have to bear the brunt of the fighting for the present.
Moscow apparently also miscalculated the intensity of the interna-
tional reaction to its intervention in Afghanistan. In terms of US-Soviet
relations, Moscow was probably ready to accept a bad press and the
delay of SALT II ratification. However, the Soviets may not have antici-
pated the American actions either to curtail shipments of feed grains
and export of high technology or to boycott the Olympics. Indeed,
clandestine reporting indicates that the Soviets may have believed
that the US was too distracted by the situation in Iran to develop a
strong response.
The Kremlin also seems to have been taken aback by the strength
of the West European response. While it no doubt expected them to
denounce Soviet actions, Moscow may not have expected the West
Europeans to give the US as much support as they have. Moscow was
probably equally surprised by the nearly unanimous hostile Islamic
reaction evoked at the Islamabad Conference in January.
In Afghanistan
Resistance in Afghanistan has evidently been stronger than Mos-
cow originally anticipated. The Babrak government has not been more
effective than Amin’s, and the internal situation has deteriorated since
the intervention.
Despite the international reaction and the resistance in Afghanistan,
the Soviets are adding men and equipment to their forces, building
permanent barracks and are apparently planning for large operations
against the rebels. The Soviets have yet to engage in major operations
against the rebels, and seem unlikely to conclude that their intervention
will not succeed in its limited military objectives of stalemating the
insurgency before a spring offensive is tried.
Diplomatic Posture
Although the Soviet media and leadership have been quick to pick
up on the theme of Soviet withdrawal from Afghanistan voiced in the
West, there has been little or no deviation from their original position
of December 27. Indeed, Brezhnev in his speech of February 22, seemed
to add to earlier demands on the question of withdrawal when he said
that the Soviets will only withdraw when the US and Afghanistan’s
neighbors are willing to “guarantee” that all outside interference in
