1170 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement d. Marine Corps Sufficient materiel, including repairable unserviceable as well as serviceable assets, is on hand to meet 52% of the M-­Day materiel require­ ment. Time required to reconstitute materiel reserves is estimated to be 18 to 24 months for major items, 10 to 12 months for ammunition, and 9 to 12 months for minor items. This estimate assumes immediate unrestricted availability of funds, and disregards possible delay due to simultaneous maximum demand on industry by all Services. Actions being taken to assume maximum utilization of reserve stocks include regular rotation to obviate deterioration; continuous maintenance in a high degree of readiness of mount-­out and resupply stocks; and selec­ tive prepositioning of supplies both in WesPac and NELM for contin­ gency requirements. 4. The logistic limitations in Southeast Asia, stemming from the lack of development of communications, port and terminal facilities and transportation means, would severely affect U.S. and friendly indigenous military operations. Furthermore, the existing logistic sup­ port facilities are extremely vulnerable to disruption and are inade­ quate to support sustained operations of U.S. and Allied forces. These limitations would probably affect enemy operations to a lesser degree. 5. Thus, lack of surface LOC’s, adequacy of terminal facilities in the area, and the status of strategic communications in Southeast Asia, are recognized as factors which would influence the nature of the operations and the type force to be employed. Military operations for Southeast Asia take into account the geophysical limitations of the area. These limitations establish the modus operandi of military operations. Any improvement in facilities would cause changes to plans to utilize the improvements. The lack of facilities is a limitation to be considered in planning. 6. In addition, there are inadequate logistical units in the indig­ enous forces of Southeast Asia for the support of their own combat forces. Current contingency plans for Southeast Asia include require­ ments for U.S. logistical units for the support of indigenous combat forces. This limitation in the indigenous force structure is recognized and, as the logistical capability of indigenous forces improves, the con­ tingency plans are revised accordingly. 7. The solution to the problems which pertain to operations in Southeast Asia is not to devote more of our current military assistance to the development of logistic, communication, and support facilities designed specifically for U.S. use. This would have an adverse impact, both political and military, on the host country. Rather, the primary objective of our military assistance program should be the improvement of indigenous capabilities with the eventual goal of adequately trained and equipped indigenous forces which are essential for the conduct of operations in Southeast Asia. In addition, one of the major objectives of
