194  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
44.	
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National 
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, December 4, 1977
SUBJECT
FY 79 DOD Budget Review
As part of our review of the FY 79 DOD Budget, I have had my 
staff prepare a set of papers that address the budget issues with the 
greatest national security implications. There are two papers on the size 
and make-­up of the overall budget, two on strategic forces issues, and 
one dealing with some new initiatives that could improve the effective-
ness of our forces.
The first paper (Tab A) examines the question of how big the defense 
budget should be. This paper does not deal with the programmatic or 
resources allocation aspects, which are the province of DOD and OMB, 
but with the broader strategic and political issues which you need to 
consider in setting the overall level of defense expenditures. I believe 
that a reasonable increase must be made in our defense request if we 
are to compensate for the effects of inflation, offset the steady Soviet 
buildup, and maintain support for your foreign policy initiatives both 
at home and abroad. While Harold’s proposed budget of about $130 B 
is certainly too large, OMB’s proposed budget of $123–125 B is probably 
too low to meet your overall national security needs.
The second paper (Tab B) compares the budget to the defense priorities 
established by the national security policies laid down by your Administration 
thus far.2 Generally, Harold has done a good job in responding to the 
new policies. However, there is one key anomaly that you may wish to 
keep in mind as you review the budget: funding for the sea forces mis-
sion continues to dominate, though the strategic concerns addressed 
by our defense policy indicate a need to shift priorities toward other 
missions, particularly toward land forces.
The third paper (Tab C) examines the mobile M–X issue—­whether to 
keep this system in the advanced development stage ($160 M in FY 79) 
or go into full-­scale development ($260 M in FY 79). This issue puts 
you in a delicate bind—­there are numerous substantive arguments 
suggesting that full-­scale development of this system is premature, yet 
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, 
Box 9, Budget: FY 1979 Defense Review: 12/77. Secret. Sent for information. A stamped 
notation indicates that Carter saw the memorandum. Carter initialed the upper right 
corner of the memorandum.
2 Tabs B–E were not found attached.
