752 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement system, which was written into basic policy last year. The revised lan­ guage reads: “The entire overseas base system should continue to be reviewed periodically in order to assure that base requirements are adequately met and are related realistically to developments in weapons technol­ ogy and other factors.” The last sentence of Paragraph 18 (which is unchanged) deals with the positioning of IRBM’s around the Soviet periphery. While I have not yet discussed this in the Planning Board, I believe that IRBM’s should be the subject of a separate paragraph and not included in the para­ graph on U.S. overseas bases. I am therefore going to propose to the Council, on my own motion, the following new paragraph: “18–A. IRBM’s will be positioned only in those NATO and other Free World nations which demonstrate a desire to have them, and pressure will not be exerted by the U.S. to persuade reluctant nations to accept them. The determination as to the positioning of additional IRBM’s will be made by the President.” Paragraph 19 (p. 15) treats generally of strengthening the collec­ tive defense system. As revised, it contains the new guidance that the U.S. should, as practicable, “induce Western European and other allies with well-­developed economies to increase their share in collec­ tive defense.” Paragraph 23 (p. 16) proposes a major change in policy and is split. Present policy provides in essence that the U.S. should seek to prevent the development by additional nations of nuclear weapons capabili­ ties (NSC 5810/1, Paragraph 18, p. 7). Some of the consultants felt that such a policy is impractical because, as one of them put it, “the black art is too well known.” The new majority proposal is that the U.S. should seek to prevent or retard the development by additional nations of nuclear weapons capabilities; but, failing that, should (1) exchange with, or provide to, selected allies (additional to the U.K.) informa­ tion on nuclear weapons and (2) even be prepared to make available nuclear weapons themselves to such allies. The Defense-­JCS version would sanction exchanging with, or providing to, additional selected allies information on nuclear weapons, but it would not go so far as to be prepared to make nuclear weapons available to selected allies. Both proposals would, of course, be subject to obtaining the necessary legis­ lative authority. (Call on: SECRETARY HERTER MR. McCONE SECRETARY McELROY ADMIRAL BURKE)
