Austrian railway, telegraph and telephone systems. The lien enjoyed by the relief bonds makes it difficult, if not impossible, for Austria to obtain the necessary funds for these purposes. Accordingly, the Austrian Government has requested the Governments holding Austrian relief bonds and the Reparation Commission to subordinate their liens in favor of the new loan for a period not exceeding thirty years. The Treasury Department is advised by the Department of State that all of the foreign governments concerned have already informed the Austrian Government to the effect that they are willing to subordinate their liens, providing all of the governments in a similar position, and the Reparation Commission, do likewise. It is further understood that the Reparation Commission has agreed to subordinate the reparation lien on Austria’s assets and revenues in favor of the new loan. The Austrian Government has requested the Government of the United States to take similar action. Since unanimous consent is required, failure of the United States to join the other Governments concerned in granting Austria’s request would constitute a barrier to the floating of the new reconstruction loan. Since the proposed loan would be for a term of thirty years, and the relief bonds mature in 1943, the mere subordination of the lien may not be sufficient to permit the flotation of the new loan. The Austrian Government is at present negotiating with the Government of the United States and the other relief creditor governments terms of payment of the relief bonds so as to provide for the liquidation of the indebtedness over a period of years. All of the relief bonds are of similar tenor and contain the following clause: “The Government of Austria agrees that no payment will be made upon or in respect of any of the obligations of said Series issued by the Government of Austria before, at or after, maturity, whether for principal or for interest, unless a similar payment shall simultaneously be made upon all obligations of the said Series issued by the Government of Austria in proportion to the respective obligations of said Series.” The Austrian Government has assured the Government of the United States that it intends to make a settlement of the relief debt at the earliest practicable date, and that it is prepared to make with the United States a
