784  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
3. Soviet apparent views on the political utility of strategic forces 
are disturbing and not compatible with several assumptions we have 
tried to get Soviet leaders to accept. (S)
4. SALT limits help considerably, but they cannot remove the Soviet 
growing edge in several comparative indicators. (S)
5. Both the NIE and Harold Brown’s analysis are consistent with 
the adverse trends initially projected in PRM–10, Comprehensive Net 
Assessment2 and updated in Comprehensive Net Assessment-1978 
which you reviewed about a year ago.3 (TS)
	
Tab D
	
National Intelligence Estimate4
NIE 11–3/8–79	
Washington, March 17, 1980
Soviet Capabilities for Strategic Nuclear Conflict Through the 
1980s
Volume I—Summary
SUMMARY5
1. During the next few years, Soviet strategic capabilities will con-
tinue to grow relative to those of the United States and NATO. The 
Soviets have pursued steady, persistent strategic programs for many 
years, while new Western programs remain largely in planning and 
development phases. We believe that important aims underlying these 
2 See Documents 3 and 11.
3 See Document 95.
4 Top Secret; [handling restriction not declassified]. Figures 1–6 were not printed.
5 The Director, Defense Intelligence Agency, the Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, 
Department of the Army, the Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of the Navy, the Assis-
tant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force, and the Director of Intelligence, 
Headquarters, Marine Corps, disassociate themselves from this volume and its characterization 
as a Summary of the Estimate. In general, they believe the Summary is not representative of the 
intelligence analyses developed in the Estimate. In their judgment, it concentrates on quantitative 
information at the expense of intelligence concerning Soviet doctrine, policy, capabilities, future 
programs, and possible initiatives. In their view, the extensive use of comparative force analysis 
in the Estimate drives and distorts the Estimate’s judgments, especially in this Summary volume.
 The holders of this view also consider the judgments outlined in the Summary as unduly 
shaped by US perceptions and strategic thinking and not properly reflective of Soviet strate-
gic objectives. The Summary should emphasize that the Soviets are pursuing strategic nuclear 
capabilities for motives quite different from those of the United States. Because of this misplaced 
emphasis, the Summary fails to explain satisfactorily the comprehensive nature of Soviet strategic 
planning involving both offensive and defensive systems. The very great political and conven-
tional military consequences of the asymmetries in strategic forces and doctrine are not adequately 
addressed. [Footnote is in the original.]
