406
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
to a CTB that allowed PNE. Strong UK statements have effectively rein-
forced US views. By end of week, Soviet Deloff Malev (Septel)5 said So-
viets were struck by firmness of US position on PNEs.
5. In what may or may not be significant, Marokhov’s tone in dis-
cussing PNEs during first week was markedly less assertive than
during previous round. During July talks, Soviet Chairman often used
strong formulations in describing Soviet position on PNEs (e.g., Soviet
government does not conceive of a solution that does not allow PNEs).
At least during this week, he has been noticeably subdued (e.g., Soviet
government sees no reason that PNEs should be banned under a CTB).
6. It is impossible at this stage to tell whether Morokhov’s behavior
can be attributed in any way to PNE positions taken by US in recent
weeks, or whether it reflects any shift in Soviet attitudes. It is conceiv-
able, given high level US-Soviet meetings on eve of present round and
possibility that Soviet leadership has taken time to consider results of
those meetings, that Soviet DTB Delegation has simply not yet received
instructions. Moreover, Marokhov has indicated that he plans to make
further statements on PNE question on Oct 11 and 12 plenaries, and he
may well return to his earlier, assertive posture. Nonetheless, contrast
seems noteworthy, and has particularly intrigued British Delegation.
7. While Delegation will begin next week to outline our thinking
on verification (starting on Tuesday6 plenary with on-site inspections),
we plan, on the PNE question, to continue, in coordination with the
British, to bear down on the Soviet position and to impress on them the
firmness and soundness of our view that a PNE ban is an essential re-
quirement of an effective CTB. We will continue to watch for any evi-
dence (such as possible indication contained in conversation reported
Septel) that Soviets may be interested in exploring solutions that would
involve banning PNEs from outset while keeping open possibility of
permitting them sometime in future. Unless otherwise instructed, we
would not, however, advance any such ideas ourselves.
Warnke
5 Malev’s comments are in telegram 8587 from Geneva, October 7. (National Ar-
chives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770367–0320)
6 October 11.
