782
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
is considerable appreciation of the fact that the oil question might long
since have been resolved in a manner satisfactory to Iran had not Mo-
sadeq preferred to exploit the problem for internal political purposes.
Although the Iranian public is eager for an oil settlement, the
problem remains an extremely sensitive one. The degree of difficulty to
be expected in negotiating and implementing an oil settlement de-
pends largely upon the tact with which developments are presented to
the public and upon the turn of political events in Iran having little to
do with the public’s essential willingness to make this or that conces-
sion to the British. The consensus of Iranian opinion consulted is that
“if all goes well” the Iranian public would accept a settlement little
more favorable than that offered Mosadeq in February of 1953.
Most Iranians, even in high government circles, are as yet insuffi-
ciently aware of the factors impeding a prompt settlement of the oil
question. For example, the importance to the West of ratification of any
such agreement by a full-fledged Majlis is not generally appreciated.
The political stresses which will inevitably be created by election cam-
paigns may provide an occasion for individual Iranian politicians to
seek to turn the oil question to their personal advantage. Although the
Iranian public now evidences a “reasonable” attitude toward the ques-
tion, it is impossible to predict the extent to which public opinion may
be influenced by unscrupulous demogoguery during the next few
months.
The Parliamentary Situation3—Another of the major problems fac-
ing the Zahedi Government is the disposition of the 21-member rump
Majlis which survived Mosadeq’s efforts to destroy it. Its members
show little inclination to disband voluntarily, and the Seventeenth
Majlis might well continue to exist in its present anomalous form until
the end of its normal term in May, 1954. Although the Majlis has legal
status, it cannot conduct regular business, enact legislation, or ratify in-
ternational agreements in the absence of a quorum. As elections of the
Seventeenth Majlis were never completed, it would be theoretically
possible to achieve a quorum by holding elections in unrepresented
constituencies for the 56 seats which were never filled. This procedure
would take less time than full-scale elections of a new Majlis. However,
actions such as the ratification of international agreements by such a
Majlis might at a later date be repudiated on the ground that the Majlis
had been “irregular” even though technically entirely legal.
3 Omitted from this discussion is the question of the revival of the Senate. There is
virtually no politically valent [sic] sentiment for the reestablishment of the Senate, and the
absence of a Senate produces no serious difficulties of legislative procedure under the Ira-
nian constitution. [Footnote is in the original.]
