International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1980–1981
745
We face a situation in which “fiscal drag” next year from higher
inflation and the January 1 social security tax increase3 will add $60 bil-
lion of deflationary pressure to the economy. Thus even a “neutral”
fiscal policy would include a tax cut in that amount. I do not mean to
argue, at this stage, for or against a cut of any specific magnitude. The
timing and size of any potential tax cut will be based on a weighing of
costs (in terms of relaxing or appearing to relax the fight against infla-
tion) against benefits (in terms of higher growth and employment). My
object is to add to the cost/benefit calculation the international implica-
tions of US macroeconomic policy.
You are aware of the steep decline in the first half of the year in the
US economy. The mid-year forecast assumes the decline tapers off in
the second half of the year and we return to modest positive growth in
1981. This pattern of decline, accompanied by an assumed recovery in
1981, is common to all the major industrial countries. In general, the de-
cline elsewhere is forecast to lag that of the US; and the recovery is ex-
pected to be modest as in the US. In particular, from mid-1980 to
mid-1981, the OECD is forecasting real growth of less than 1% for the
six Summit countries other than the US and about one percent growth
for all the OECD excluding the US. With the United States, OECD
growth rates will be even lower. Thus the main engines of growth in
the world economy will be virtually dead in the water during the next
year.
The continuing weakness of growth abroad is at least partly attrib-
utable to the fact that the 1979–80 increase in oil prices has not yet
worked fully through their economies. In addition, the other industrial
countries, like the US, are generally following restrictive fiscal and
monetary policies. Interest rates abroad rose with US rates early this
year. The other industrial countries also have fiscal drag arising from
the effects of inflation on tax revenues and will also have stagnant
public expenditure (in real terms) through the rest of 1980.
There are three aspects of the overseas impact of our economic
growth which I would like to emphasize. The first has to do with the
impact on rates of growth abroad. In the early post-war period a slow-
down in the US had very sharp effects on growth elsewhere in the
world through our demand for imports from abroad. That effect is
weaker today, but is still important. In the meantime, however, growth
abroad and world demand for US exports have become more impor-
tant to us. A fall in European economic activity or a slower recovery
will noticeably affect the depth of our recession and the speed of our re-
covery. CEA’s mid-year forecast takes account of foreign demand for
3 The salary base on which the social security tax was assessed increased on Janu-
ary 1. (Deborah Rankin, “Taxes,” The New York Times, January 1, 1980, p. 32)
