936
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
but that Ambassador Smith—who, of course, is the US Representative
to the IAEA—is the primary source. Either he or Farley will go to the
April meeting of the Board, and would be happy to talk with the So-
viets if they wish. We do hope to see this issue resolved in April.
Bessmertnykh said that, while Farley may be right in saying that
the situation in Western Europe on non-proliferation is different than
that elsewhere, EURATOM should not be setting a bad example for
others, but on the contrary should be out front in accepting a maximal
IAEA role. Farley noted the high degree of nuclear energy develop-
ment in the EC, the preexistence of EURATOM safeguards and the
technical complexities involved, and expressed doubt that others could
credibly point to the EURATOM–IAEA situation as a precedent for na-
tional situations elsewhere.
The two agreed to stay in touch on non-proliferation issues, partic-
ularly where IAEA-related.
After the meeting, Bessmertnykh told Salisbury he agreed that EU-
RATOM–IAEA arrangements were nearing a satisfactory conclusion,
but repeated that he is concerned at the precedential effect, and at the
prospect that general US-Soviet agreement on non-proliferation goals
will diverge in specific cases because of “other factors” present in such
cases.
368.
Paper Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1
RP 78–10315
Washington, September 1978
The Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty:
Looking Toward the 1980 Review Conference
Key Judgments
The Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT), an important bul-
wark against the spread of nuclear weapons, will receive its second
five-year review at a conference to be held in 1980. Forces operating
outside the treaty—especially the security concerns and regional ri-
valries of nonnuclear weapons states—will continue to be the main de-
terminants of the scope and rate of the proliferation process. But the
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Unfiled
File, Box 144, Nuclear Non-Proliferation: 9/78–1/81. Confidential.
