Afghanistan 187 reaction in the Arab world, Iran and the subcontinent—without taking on Amin directly or aligning ourselves with the rebels. This is essentially a non-interventionist view, and most held it to be compatible with our military capabilities, both direct and indirect in the region, and with our limited interests. It means that we will reject the strong suggestion which the Chinese have apparently made to us to provide weapons for the rebels through the Pakistanis. In fact, most parties were cool to the idea that such aid might be useful even if the Soviets do intervene in great force. The State, NSC, and CIA view was that we want to “wring our hands like mad” and “make them pay a price” but not be drawn into the melee inside Afghanistan. Constable of State, however, advanced the view that if there was a large scale intervention we would want to: —Deploy forces (tactical air) to Pakistan and accelerate the deployment of a carrier task force to the Arabian Sea. —Condemn Soviet action in UN as a threat to peace. —Consult with the Indians about defense of the Subcontinent. The meeting did not really come to grips with the problem that an enlarged U.S. role in defense of the Subcontinent probably means arms for Pakistan and a reduction, if not end, of our pressures on the Pakistanis in nuclear matters. Also, given our wholly diplomatic posture on the current increased Soviet presence in Afghanistan—5000–6000 people, propping up another hateful radical regime—we can expect another chorus of discontent from the Saudis, Israelis, Jordanians, Pakistanis, Chinese, Egyptians and others about an America which is unable or unwilling to act. While we may be constrained in acting in the public arena at the moment—by the precarious position of the SALT treaty and our limited interests in Afghanistan and limited resources which can be brought to bear, we should consider a more active clandestine effort in both propaganda and support for rebel groups. Iran would probably be sympathetic. The Paks would cooperate. The Iraqis would not object. The Saudis would be mollified. The stakes would be raised for the Soviets near our most crucial and vulnerable overseas resource region— the Gulf. Robert J. Murray4 Deputy Assistant Secretary 4 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.
