Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks
15
massing forces, Soviet intelligence message transmissions, Soviet
weather data over U.S. deployment routes, and Soviet communications.
(TS) In a December 1976 response17 to the ad hoc NSC Panel report
that led to NSDM 345, the Secretary of Defense stated that it is [3 lines
not declassified] He further suggested that it was not appropriate to
initiate an immediate program to develop and deploy an ASAT inter-
ceptor using the then state-of-the-art techniques rather than use devel-
oping technology. At this time a U.S. direct ascent nonnuclear inter-
ceptor development and test program has been approved. Deployment
planning is underway, but deployment has not been approved.
C. Verification
Soviet compliance with an ASAT treaty cannot be assumed, and
the net assessment must account for the possibility of Soviet cheating.
1. General
(TS) [2 paragraphs (10 lines) not declassified]
—The Soviets have existing ASAT capabilities [4 lines not declassi-
fied] the ABM/ASAT role of Galosh, [2 lines not declassified]
—A relatively small level of successful cheating, e.g., a handful of
ASAT’s and EW sites, could have a high payoff.
Although the U.S. would abide by the limitations, we could not
have confidence that the Soviets would do likewise if the agreement
were not verifiable.
(TS) On the other hand, if ASAT testing were banned [8 lines not
declassified]
2. Particular U.S. Verification Concerns
(TS) a. [1 paragraph (5 lines) not declassified]
(TS) b. [1 paragraph (13 lines) not declassified]
(TS) [2½ lines not declassified] Over time the Soviets might lose
system confidence without such testing. The Department of Defense
believes that confidence would not be lost, e.g., the U.S. has retained
confidence in the Titan II ICBM force without launches over many
years. The Soviets could conduct crew training by launching satellites.
For example, the U.S. system at Johnston Island was maintained opera-
tional for eight years after the last ASAT test by allowing the crew to
launch weather satellites from Vandenberg Air Force Base.
17 See Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol. XXXV, National Security Policy, 1973–1976,
Document 123.
