January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981 1291 autonomy talks. This is virtually impossible. They can come to speak on the right of self-determination, freedom, and independence. This they can do; they can talk to others, in a peaceful channel. But within agreements whose end result is not clear, or is limited, what can they do? This is a block. The President said that they do not have to acknowledge they are not getting all they want. They can demand that Israel get out, and that they take over their rights; that they want to take over their rights on land, etc. We will not say that they have to give up ultimate rights. The Prime Minister asked whether Israel would permit a Congress in the West Bank? Jordan could arrange that. They could meet, and draw up a peaceful platform. Is this idea tolerable? Then Jordan would talk to other Arabs and the PLO. This is a peaceful channel. But it has to be outside of a presupposed course of action. If the Palestinians are asked just to take over providing services on the West Bank, we are not likely to get cooperation. They would say that this only relieves Israel of the burden, when Israel is going about annexing the West Bank. Therefore, this would only help Begin. Settlements would go on; absorption would go on. It is not likely that West Bankers would agree. Also there was the violence against the elected leaders. King Hussein mentioned the expulsions, as well. The Prime Minister agreed (and listed several of the expulsions). They were not engaged in violent acts; they would see Dayan and Weizman; they are not violent people. They could have been a rival force. The problem is that Israel is suppressive. If the Palestinians could assemble peacefully, have a Congress, write a platform, ask what they want, then they can talk with others, outside the Camp David context. The President said that this is not prohibited under the Camp David agreements. The U.S. takes the Jordanian position. Israel wants only 12 people on an Administrative Council. Egypt wants it to be larger, and be a legislature or Congress. Nothing prevents the mayors or others from saying what they want to do as they proceed to get to ultimate goals: the right to vote, assemble, speak, exercise local responsibilities—as an interim stage. Ambassador Linowitz said that when he met with His Majesty in London,8 he (His Majesty) had wished us well, but could not say we would succeed and we were not responsive to Palestinian needs and self-fulfillment. Since the Palestinians are not there, how can we respond? Israel says: how can the U.S. and Egypt know what the Palestinians want? Therefore there is the President’s suggestion, to help us advance Palestinian positions, and ensure consultations—however 8 See Document 334.
