1956 915 and that our limited amendments of his draft should not make the document unacceptable to him. We are willing to accept slightly less desirable wording in paragraph two in order to preserve this position. Mr. Robertson concurred strongly with Judge Phleger on these points. The feeling was unanimous that we could not possibly consider doing away with the specific reference to the right of individual and collective self defense. This seems to us a cardinal point, and the cession of the point could undermine the foundations of the protective com­ mitment we seek. Our misgivings on this score assume redoubled force in the light of the importance we have attached to this provision in the discussions to date. If we abandon this phrase now after an issue has been made of it, great significance would inevitably be read into our action, with possibly dangerous consequences. We are sending you separately a communication delivered to the British in Peiping, by the Chinese Communist Foreign Office propos­ ing a general conference on the NNSC and on a political settlement in Korea. This was delivered to us by the British only 24 hours ago and is still under preliminary consideration here. If you have any thoughts on how this ties in with Communist strategy as observed by you at Geneva we would like to have them. Mr. Robertson saw Congressmen Richards and Dodd yesterday on the matter of the proposed House investigation of the maltreatment of Americans in Communist China. He explained our request to the Sen­ ate Subcommittee to postpone a similar investigation, and expressed the hope that the House Committee would do likewise. He stressed that the timing of such an investigation might be wrong at this moment although it could well be useful later on. He felt that we should not dis­ sipate the impact of a forcible campaign by letting the story of the out­ rages come out in driblets. If and when we start a campaign it should be well organized and we should got the benefit of the full impact of the whole story. We understand that Father Rigney is testifying before the Senate Subcommittee next week. This is isolated testimony in con­ nection with the book he has written on his experiences which is to be published in a few weeks. We have not objected to his appearances before the Committee. We have not yet had a reply from Justice to our request for the survey of the deportability of Chinese prisoners. It is undoubtedly a tedious and delicate project. We are continuing to give I & N.S. the data provided by Wang on the Chinese alleged to be encountering difficulty in returning to Mainland China. I hope Nagoski will have some of the information from I & N.S. soon. Of course it is intended only for our own confidential background illumination. We are running into a real budgetary and personnel problem in keeping you supplied with officer manpower. Hong Kong feels that its
