Chapter 8, June–August 1991  1147
arrived from the U.S. Embassy, the Soviet lawyers became increasingly 
agitated.
16. As soon as the “alternat” arrived at the MFA, the two groups 
were quickly shuttled out past increasingly less populated areas out-
side the Moscow ring road, passing at regular intervals militia guards 
standing alongside of the road. As the road narrowed and the guards 
became more frequent, the Volga turned sharply off the highway onto 
an unmarked and unpaved one-lane country road. About five min-
utes after making that turn, the lead Volga, in which Brown, Dalton, 
and Sutter were situated, slowed down as a Babushka approached 
along the left side of the road, clutching a jar half full of raspberries. 
The driver leaned out and asked whether he was on the correct road to 
Gorbachev’s Dacha. The Babushka, pointing back through the woods 
to the highway from which the two Volgas had turned, motioned that 
the Volgas had gone a crossroad too far. The Volgas were promptly put 
into reverse for the return trip to the highway, and the Dacha was found 
shortly afterwards.
17. Once at the Dacha, the sides waited for about forty-five minutes 
for the presidents to break, and the signing of the six START protocols 
and the memorandum of understanding was accomplished in short 
order. The only event of note was that each of the presidents initially 
missed signing one of the protocols, due to the large number of signa-
tures required in one of the three treaty binders and the small num-
ber of pages for several of the protocols. The omissions were quickly 
noted by Brown and rectified. The Secretary and the Foreign Minister 
signed the three separate agreements (early exchange of lists, early 
exhibitions, and geographic coordinates), signed and exchanged the 
letters on third-country basing, and initialled the SLCM declarations. 
Bessmertnykh handed over a letter on the legally binding nature of the 
phased reduction of heavy ICBMs exchange of letters and initialled the 
backfire declaration.
Holding the Protocols “Open” for Technical Changes
18. During one of the breaks at Novo-Ogarevo, Brown and Dalton 
asked Yakovlev about the requirements for “sealing” the START treaty 
documents. Yakovlev responded that the sealing of the treaty proper 
would have to be done on August 1 at the MFA, showing absolutely 
no flexibility on that point. Pressed by Brown, Yakovlev stated that the 
protocols and MOU could be sealed at a later time, to allow for final 
checking of references and other conforming changes, allowing that 
this was perfectly reasonable and would in fact be done by the Soviet 
side. The sides agreed that four weeks would be a sufficient amount 
of time to hold these other documents open to permit such technical 
changes to be made, and that the exchange of replacement pages and 
sealing could be done through diplomatic channels.
