Human Rights American interests. The outcry over PL 480 reporting requirements could be a sample of what is to come, especially if the human rights policy does in fact do visible damage to other interests (e.g., if US agricultural exports are hurt, or if the Philippine base negotiations should go sour). The fact that we were carrying out the expressed will of Congress would not greatly lessen the wrath of some of its members who belatedly realized what was going on. VII. The Lessons of Hindsight Most of the problems noted above will be with us as long as we have an active human rights policy. They are part of an unavoidable balancing act. But there is room for improvement, and some hard questions need attention. Policy Reaffirmation A Presidential Directive would help (the human rights PRM hasn’t had one) to clarify to the bureaucracy how the President views the policy, its application, and the range of instruments being used. We understand that a draft is now with the President. Country Strategies We badly need country strategy papers that will integrate our human rights interests with other American concerns, and give useful guidance for applying all our instruments of influence. There is still an inclination on the part of many to fight the problem and to avert any measures which may affect countries with which they deal. Country strategy papers which took for granted the objectives of our human rights policies and outlined alternative means for achieving these ends, including both incentives, sanctions, and other approaches would vastly contribute to the process of decision making. Senior policy officials still would have to give time-consuming attention to, for instance, individual loan proposals, in light of the human rights situation at a particular moment and what else was happening (e.g., an important visit or negotiation). But we need a better context for those decisions—general guidance as to the relative weight to be given to our different instruments of leverage in a particular country, and why, and a sense of how to phase in the use of those instruments The regional bureaus have most at stake here. The tenacity of this Administration’s commitment to an active human rights policy is now clear; it is in the bureaus’ interest that it be sensibly implemented. Assistant Secretaries and their Deputies (and regional experts in S/P) should consider country action strategies a matter of high priority. Bureaucratic Gaps Gaps in our internal procedures would inhibit implementation of coherent country strategies, even if we had them. We especially need
