422 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II “justified” the violation of human rights in the interests of the “majority.” There was also a notably high level of debate on the Southern African issues. The theme pressed time and again was that the West was “guilty” of a double standard on human rights by refusing to take practical action on South Africa. Even this debate had some comfortable moments for the U.S. when, for example, the delegate from Lesotho in tracing historic low points of man’s inhumanity to man cited “Prague, 1968.”6 Nevertheless, it was clear that South Africa will continue to be one of the most important measures of U.S. moral credibility in this forum. 19. Indeed the Africans throughout the HRC were the key, generally controlling factors. In particular Keba M’baye, Chief Justice of Senegal, proved himself to be a superb chairman. As Department will recall, he promised and delivered a credible and creditable session of the HRC. He was a tough and efficient manager of session proceedings and yet politically deft enough to pre-empt several developing confrontations by work behind the scenes to obtain consensus actions or at least soften the sting of decisions unacceptable to US (African and Arab-Israeli issues) and to others. USDel would strongly recommend that Department consider an appropriate expression of U.S. appreciation for M’baye’s contribution at the highest levels in Senegal. Indeed only next year when M’baye is no longer in the chair of the HRC will we be able to see clearly whether this session was a phenomenon or a step forward toward a fragile but promising new international human rights understanding. In any event this session has demonstrated that human rights objectives in the UN fora can be pursued with, rather than in spite of, the Third World. 20. The private remarks of a Soviet DelOff to one of our DelOffs yesterday suggest the Soviets are considerably less than content with this session. The Soviet observed that the U.S. should be pleased with the meeting’s result. Our DelOff remarked that share-and-share alike was presumably acceptable to any Marxist-Leninist. The Soviet response was: “yes, but not here.” Vanden Heuvel 6 Reference is to the late August 1968 Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia.
