Comprehensive Test Ban
337
The following pros and cons are in addition to those in Option A
above.
Advantages
—Provides time for multinational exploration on verification
measures which could be incorporated in an eventual CTB.
—Provides experience in implementing TTB/PNE Treaties and in
assessing Soviet cooperativeness with regard to these treaty provisions.
—Provides time for a US assessment of progress on a broad range
of the US/USSR security relationships.
Disadvantages
—Would be viewed by some as inconsistent with stated US objec-
tive of prompt cessation of testing, and thus could complicate TTB/
PNE ratification.
—Would probably delay the earliest date of a CTB agreement.
—Possible non-proliferation benefits would be deferred until
favorable CTB decision is clearly demonstrated by initiating CTB
negotiations.
—Would defer possible benefits to US-Soviet relationship.
D. Lowered Threshold
This option could be accomplished as an additional step in either
Option A or C above. It would involve lowering the threshold at an
early date to perhaps 75 kt or so, and could also include further sched-
uled reductions towards a very low threshold or CTB. This might pro-
vide some of the non-proliferation advantages of a moratorium with re-
duced verification risks, and at 75 kt would permit completion of much
of our tactical weapons modernization effort. It could also assist us in
ratification of the TTB/PNE Treaties by demonstrating the President’s
commitment to progress in this area and would mitigate criticisms that
the 150 kt threshold is too high. If the period of testing at 75 kt were
prolonged, however, it would be desirable to review and possibly
amend the TTB/PNE Treaties to ensure adequate verification. (This
could be a complex negotiation in itself.)
VIII. PNE Accommodation Considerations
A. Introduction
Since the initiation of US arms control policy to limit nuclear
weapon testing, it has been recognized that peaceful nuclear explosions
(PNEs) present special and difficult problems for the achievement of an
adequately verified test ban. In seeking a test ban agreement with the
Soviet Union, the US must take account of the facts that the US cur-
rently has only a very small PNE program while the Soviets have an ac-
tive PNE program and have expressed their desires and plans for con-
tinuing that program during a test ban. Because of economic factors,
