948
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
I recommend that you:
—express your admiration for Tito as a great statesman and leader
who contributed significantly to strengthening world peace. You might
mention your extended correspondence with Tito, which he highly
valued.
—reiterate our firm support for Yugoslavia’s independence, unity
and territorial integrity and our respect for Yugoslavia’s nonaligned
position.
—express confidence in the new Yugoslav leadership’s ability to
handle the transition.
—regret that you could not attend the funeral as you had hoped
and note that you have asked the Vice President to represent you. (C)
The meeting should only take about five minutes. There will be a
photo opportunity. (U)
You met Loncar when he presented his credentials in Novem-
ber. (U)
290.
Telegram From the Embassy in Yugoslavia to the
Department of State1
Belgrade, May 8, 1980, 0855Z
3621. Subj: Tito Funeral: VP Mondale Bilateral With Kolisevski.
1. S-entire text.
2. Summary: SFRY Presidency President Lazar Kolisevski met
for a special bilateral with Vice President Mondale shortly after the
Vice President’s arrival in Belgrade on May 7 at the head of the US
delegation to the funeral of Yugoslav President Tito.2 Accompanying
the Vice President were Secretary of the Treasury Miller; Ambassador
Eagleburger; Assistant Secretary George Vest; New York Federal
Reserve Bank Chairman Anthony Solomon; Deputy Assistant to the
President David Aaron; and Assistant to the Vice President Denis Clift.
Yugoslavs present in addition to Kolisevski included Foreign Secretary
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800227–1187.
Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Also sent to the White House. Drafted by Dunlop; cleared
by Clift.
2 Lazar Kolisevski had been elected on May 15, 1979, as Vice President of the
Presidency of Yugoslavia for a one-year term. Upon Tito’s death on May 4, he assumed
the office of the Presidency. He was replaced by Cvijetin Mijatovic on May 15, 1980. See
Document 288.
