1978 447 100. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1 Washington, October 25, 1978 SUBJECT The Triad and Its Alternatives Harold Brown has sent you an information memo responding to your questions in the recent Mid-Term Defense Review meeting about the need to maintain a full Triad of strategic forces.2 Harold argues that while various combinations of SLBMs, bombers and novel ICBM deployment schemes or M–X/MAP can give us roughly equal cost Dyads or Triads that will equally well maintain an overall balance with the Soviets in terms of the usual static measures and dynamic exchange calculations, by going to a posture without M–X/MAP, we will give up features of the ICBM force that have substantial perceptual and military value. Harold specifically suggests that allowing the Soviets to pressure us into giving up the military advantages of an ICBM force while they retain them would have a “disastrous effect” on both international and domestic perceptions. The military capabilities we would sacrifice to at least some degree are: independence from tactical warning; endurance after an initial exchange; quick response hard-­target kill capability; good C3; and warfighting capability—­which is the ability to use limited amounts of strategic forces against particular numbers and types of targets selected on the basis of how a nuclear war unfolds. Harold also comments on the value of diversity in strategic forces, particularly as a hedge against the unexpected, and presents a short discussion of problems he sees with four alternative missile deployment schemes (air-­mobile, ground-­mobile, air-­launched, and offshore submersible). Overall, the memo makes a forceful case for modernizing our strategic force posture with M–X/MAP. In so doing it raises a number of interesting and difficult issues that should be more fully illuminated. Specifically: Harold is imposing requirements on our strategic force posture, [2 lines not declassified]—­which they don’t now meet and which have never 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 89, Doctrine/C3I: 1978. Top Secret; Sensitive. Sent for information. The date is handwritten. Carter initialed the upper right corner of the memorandum. 2 See Document 97.
