670
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
(S) We do not believe that the USSR’s current and projected level
of military involvement in Afghanistan significantly degrades its ability
to initiate direct, simultaneous military actions elsewhere. For example,
presently only 5 of the USSR’s 173 ground divisions have been commit-
ted directly in support of Soviet operations in Afghanistan. Although
there has been some minor siphoning off of troops and equipment
from areas not contiguous to Afghanistan, the Soviet force structure
opposite NATO, Yugoslavia, and China remains essentially intact and
for the most part unaffected by the military incursion into Afghanistan.
Furthermore, the USSR’s military presence in Afghanistan has not
affected the capabilities of the military forces of other Warsaw Pact
nations.
[Omitted here is the body of the appraisal.]
247.
Intelligence Memorandum Prepared in the Central
Intelligence Agency1
[memorandum number not declassified]
Washington, April 2, 1980
The Supply of Weapons to the Afghan Nationalist Forces
([classification marking not declassified])
The Afghan insurgents have been relatively successful in avoiding
the Soviet offensive in eastern Afghanistan over the past month. While
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,
Job 81B00401R: Subject Files of the Presidential Briefing Coordinator for DCI (1977–81),
Box 6, Afghan Crisis—Pubs Insurgents. Top Secret; [codeword and handling restriction not
declassified]. A typed statement at the bottom of the page reads: “This memorandum
was prepared in the Regional Analysis Division of the Office of Strategic Research.
Comments and/or queries may be directed to [1 line not declassified].” In a covering
memorandum to Brzezinski, April 9, Turner noted: “Pursuant to the tasking arising out
of the Special Coordination Committee meeting on 28 March, I am submitting an analysis
on the Afghan resistance in terms of its effectiveness and how much aid it is receiving
from various sources. As to the question raised at the SCC meeting as to whether it
would be advisable to make public the fact that we are providing that aid, I would
strongly advise against such a course of action; the Middle Eastern countries who are
participating in this effort are already increasingly leery about published reports of
outside aid to the Afghan resistance, and any open, explicit admission of this assistance,
or any allusion to their role therein, could be fatal to the continuation of this assistance.”
(National Security Council, Carter Administration Intelligence Files, Box I–031, Sep–Dec
1980) The summary of conclusions of the March 28 SCC meeting is in the Carter Library,
National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, General Odom File, Box 47, Security
Framework: Minutes of Meetings: 1–4/80.
