1120 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement harassment, denials and restrictions which have no counterpart in our treatment of Bloc attache personnel in this country. Meanwhile, Soviet employees of the UN Secretariat remain exempt from travel restrictions which are applied to Soviet nationals in reciprocity for Soviet travel restrictions on U.S. nationals. (5) [text not declassified] e. Turning to the investigative aspects of the Internal Security Program— which will [illegible in the original] the policy recommending and coor­ dinating responsibility of the ICIS—a number of specific programs are treated in the report. Security measures have been established in such areas as: [text not declassified] Internal Security controls on seamen coming off Soviet bloc ships. The screening of Bloc escapees and refugees. The screening of visa applicants from Communist countries. Border control measures and standby emergency border controls. There is also a Watch List program under which selected agencies furnish the State Department a list of their employees who possess information so sensitive that their departure from the U.S. could pres­ ent a danger to the internal security. Then if a listed employee applies for a passport, State consults with the agency involved. And (jointly with IIC) a countermeasures program to detect and defend against clandestine introduction and use of nuclear weapons. Continued improvements in our internal security databases are considered possible and [illegible in the original] in making the internal security problems posed by the following: The admission of Soviet bloc visitors to the United States under our policy on East-West Exchanges. The absence of legislation to permit the denial of U.S. passports to Communists. The lack of legal authority by the Immigration and Naturalization Service to exercise closer controls over the subversive activities of aliens who are in the U.S. prior to their departure under deportation orders. The absence of an adequate program, under the auspices of OCDM, to provide the necessary physical security protection for key Government and industrial facilities against clandestine attack by nuclear, biological and chemical weapons, on the order of protection which is afforded to facilities which are under the cognizance of NSC and Defense.
