Options Identified 325 to be concerned that the USG would somehow manipulate the question of the discrepancy in the numbers in a way that would escalate tensions. It was pointed out to Coffin that the students have now admitted that there are 49 hostages and that the clergy did not see all of them. The discrepancy question is now narrowed to one hostage. The Secretary suggested that the clergy say that they had seen 43 hostages and had given the names to the Department and talked to the families. The Department would note that there were 50 hostages on the compound and that clarification has been requested from the Iranians. The clergy appeared to accept this formulation. 124. Memorandum From the Director of the Policy Planning Staff (Lake) to Secretary of State Vance1 Washington, December 28, 1979 This memorandum suggests possible steps to be taken on Iran, covering the three tracks we have been pursuing: —pressures on Iran; —public statements on our position; and —private approaches. It draws on a number of thoughts suggested by Dave Newsom, and is based on a meeting he held with Iran experts from various bureaus and with Dr. [name not declassified]2 It does not look at Iran in the context of our concerns on Afghanistan. We should, however, in making decisions on our military posture—and on our longer term relations with Iran—bear the Afghanistan angle in mind. The course we have been pursuing in Iran has positioned us very well, both domestically and in international opinion. We have shown 1 Source: Department of State, Records of David D. Newsom, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, Subject Files, 1978–1981, Lot 81D154, Diplomatic Strategy for Iran. Secret; Sensitive; Nodis. In a December 28 covering memorandum to Vance, Lake noted that Newsom, Tarnoff, Constable, and Raphel had “gone over this and generally agree.” Copies of the covering memorandum were sent to Christopher, Newsom, Saunders, Tarnoff, Raphel, and Constable. 2 Memorandum from Newsom to Lake, December 26. (Department of State, Records of David D. Newsom, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, Subject Files, 1978– 1981, Lot 81D154, Miscellaneous Document)
