1414 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement 826. Telegram 235 from Geneva1 Geneva, September 12, 1957, noon 235. From Johnson. One hour twenty five minute meeting this morning mostly devoted to correspondents. Wang proposed and I rejected draft agreed announcement (full text by separate telegram). Under this PRC rpt PRC and USA “agreed to give permission, on an equal and reciprocal basis, for correspondents” to enter the respective countries. In rejecting I made exact statement in para 3 of Deptel 244 including last sentence. At close of meeting Wang stated they were going to release text draft agreed announcement but did not indicate timing. Wang opened with long statement in hard tone referring to my “general repetition of worn-out arguments” at last meeting and gen­ eral attempt to place blame for lack of progress on PRC, “consistently hostile attitude” of U.S. and leading into correspondents by reference to cultural exchange proposal September 22. 1956. “In spite of US obsta­ cles” Stevens, Harrington and Worthy came to PRC and “completed their press coverage”. In spite of obstacles US youth delegation had also entered PRC and were being “warmly welcomed and with an abundance of good will”. “Does not this show that no official ban can prevent Chinese and American peoples from showing their demand for better contacts”. After nearly a year US had on August 22 under great pressure given permission certain number of correspondents visit PRC. “In same breath statement in entirely unreasonable terms refused accord reciprocal visas to Chinese newsmen. Subsequent state­ ments have not altered this”. US August 22 statement set tasks for US correspondents in PRC and thus ulterior motive and US undisguised attempt interfere in PRC internal affairs all too clear. None could con­ ceive PRC would accept August 22 statement which disregards reci­ procity and equality. PRC believes exchange visits of correspondents is a practical and concrete step to improving Sino-American relations and therefore proposes agreed announcement. Text meets need for equality and reciprocity. In reply I “found it astounding” that he had “entirely reversed” position he had taken last year when he had stressed PRC was not ask­ ing reciprocity for admission correspondents. Also under US laws and regulations impossible to assure reciprocity. Therefore in light these two facts statement reciprocity included August 22 statement. Also found 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/9–1257. Confidential; Niact; Limit Distribution.
