1980  867
ago.8 To try to reduce misunderstanding of these comments, the report 
will be released following a background briefing to explain that this 
Administration was the first ever to conduct such a test of our mobili-
zation procedures, and that we have remedial efforts underway to cor-
rect the deficiencies observed during the exercises. (U)
[Omitted here is material unrelated to national security policy.]
Exercise GLOBAL SHIELD: The Strategic Air Command recently 
completed the largest and most comprehensive Air Force strategic 
readiness exercise ever conducted. During the nine-­day schedule, 
every facet of SAC’s Emergency War Order was realistically tested: 
[number not declassified] missiles and [number not declassified] aircraft 
were brought to maximum readiness levels, over [number not declassi-
fied] sorties were flown, and an ICBM was launched from Vandenberg 
AFB, California. The exercise highlighted our ability to generate and 
maintain strategic weapons systems at heightened alert levels. (S)
Harold Brown
8 Carter underlined “as they existed two years ago” and wrote in the left margin 
next to it: “Emphasize this.”
206.	 Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National 
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, July 24, 1980
SUBJECT
OMB Report on FY 82 DOD Budget (U)
As background for the OMB Spring budget review you are sched-
uled to attend from 2–4 p.m. tomorrow, Jim McIntyre has sent you a 
memo reporting the status of the FY 82 defense program.2 The main 
message in the memo is a little diffuse, but not really arguable—­you are 
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Agency 
File, Box 7, Defense Department: 5–7/80. Secret. Sent for information. Carter initialed 
the upper right corner of the memorandum. Copies were sent to Brown and McIntyre.
2 According to the President’s Daily Diary, this meeting took place in the Cabinet 
Room from 2 to 3 p.m. on July 25. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials, President’s 
Daily Diary). No minutes of the meeting were found.
