September 1953–December 1954
831
caches of arms and explosives were uncovered and confiscated. Ac-
cording to a communique´ from the Ministry of Interior, released on the
day before General Dadsetan’s interview, a total of 1375 Tudeh Party
members were arrested in all of Iran during the Iranian month of Mehr
(September 23–October 22). On November 4, the pro-Government
newspaper, Etela’at, took cognizance of the Military Governor’s inter-
view but pointed out that the authorities must distinguish between
people duped by the Tudeh and those who have been active in furth-
ering Tudeh aims, and called for Government efforts to insure employ-
ment for those elements in the population most susceptible to Tudeh
propaganda.
General Dadsetan indicated that the Government is aware of the
cooperation between the various pro-Mosadeq and Tudeh elements, al-
though he did not specifically mention the new Tudeh-inspired Na-
tional Resistance Movement. He did make the statement, however, that
Hosein Fatemi, ex-Minister of Foreign Affairs, Dr. Sanjabi, and Engi-
neers Hasibi and Zirakzadeh were using the funds which they had ac-
cumulated illegally while serving under Dr. Mosadeq to further the
cause of the Tudeh and allied pro-Mosadeq organizations.
The Military Governor’s office further demonstrated its efficiency
during the week of the Shah’s birthday, when it was generally expected
that the Tudeh would attempt to create difficulties. The actual birthday
celebrations on October 26 were well guarded and orderly. The Sports
Festival later in the same week was completely free of Tudeh activity.
At the same time the security forces issued a communique´ notifying
Tudeh members and sympathizers in several local factories that the
Government was aware of their plans for sabotage. Additional guards
have been stationed in the main power station, the Government silo,
the oil depot, and in the Government distribution centers for bread, oil
and electricity.
A number of correspondents have been invited by the General
Staff, Iranian Army, to witness the execution in Resht of “a very dan-
gerous member of the Tudeh Party in the North”, a certain Hadi Nazar
Mohammadi. The General Staff communique´ noted that the prisoner
had for some time been engaged in espionage activities for the Soviet
Government and has been found guilty of acts of sabotage in factories
in the northern provinces and of inciting the mobs on August 16 to
overthrow the Shah’s statues. According to newspaper reports a Soviet
spy called Alioff is also a target of Government security measures. De-
spite protests from the Soviet Embassy, the Government, armed with
“conclusive proofs establishing the charges brought against this dan-
gerous element”, plans to put him on trial in the near future.
Situation in the Ministries and in the Provinces
The situation within the various Ministries of Government ap-
pears to be quiet. The Ministry of Finance announced on October 25
