International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977 189 5. Some depreciation in the value of the dollar may occur if our current account deficit continues to grow. If the depreciation is moderate and orderly, the bad consequences (increased prices for imports) would be outweighed by the good consequences (promotion of exports). 6. We cannot, however, rule out the possibility that growing trade and current account deficits would have two highly undesirable consequences: (a) substantially increase protectionist pressure here; (b) a psychological impact on holders of dollars, leading to a sharp and disorderly decline in the dollar, which in turn might lead to competitive devaluation or protectionist measures in other countries. We think the probability of (b) is quite small, but not zero. 7. Almost any action to reduce the trade deficit substantially will have budgetary, economic, or other costs. But some possible actions would have far less costs than others. 8. There is a list of items we could explore, not all of which relate to oil. (In each category I have tried to list the items in order of least cost.) A. Oil imports (i) Rescind the plan to cut back Elk Hills petroleum reserves production3 (up to $1½ billion lower imports). (ii) Speed up repairs to Alaskan pipeline and accelerate second phase (can it be done, and at what cost?). The potential national savings on oil imports are very large. (iii) Stretch out oil acquisition for the strategic petroleum reserves (we think current plans call for about $4 billion in purchases in 1978). (iv) Work closely with Saudis, Iranians, and others to see what we can do to encourage increased production, smaller price increases, and willingness to hold dollars (e.g., should we develop special kinds of investment instruments for them?). (v) Institute additional voluntary gasoline and other energy conservation measures (substantial question if they can have a lasting effect, but could be explored). (vi) Surcharge on oil imports. Hard to sell to the public; would also raise price of domestic energy and add to inflation. 3 Among the measures included in Carter’s national energy plan, which he submitted to Congress on April 20, was a proposal to limit production at the Federallyowned Elk Hills Naval Petroleum Reserve in California. See footnote 7, Document 25.
