1979  641
to the President about SALT to leak to Evans & Novak.4 Jones noted 
that it poses a real dilemma to the Chiefs to be so muted when they 
have such concerns about where we are going, and he commented that 
he has never seen his fellow Chiefs or the Allies more concerned than 
they are now. He remarked that the NIEs sound more pessimistic now 
and that past NIEs have proven optimistic in their projections of the 
future. He said that he expected that the Soviets may be very assertive 
during the early ’80s and that thus this period will be far less stable. He 
noted that we are far more vulnerable today than we used to be, partic-
ularly given our dependence upon imported oil. He also remarked that 
in his view the Soviets probably could achieve a conventional victory 
in NATO though they cannot feel confident of it. Finally, General Jones 
said that his colleagues told him that they don’t believe that it will be 
possible for Jones to express their concerns strongly enough. (TS)
Dr. Brzezinski noted that the meeting was already behind schedule 
and suggested that the discussion of tactical nuclear forces be skipped 
except for a request to Secretary Brown to develop specific deploy-
ment plans for tactical nuclear forces for discussion in another meet-
ing. Dr. Brzezinski also suggested that the President show Chancellor 
Schmidt during his upcoming visit5 the illustrative plan for long-­range 
tactical nuclear forces that was forwarded to him during the weekend, 
and thus attempt to smoke out his attitudes about having Pershing II 
only in Germany and only GLCM elsewhere. Finally, Dr. Brzezinski 
noted that we should consider possible short-­term fixes to the strategic 
imbalance problem that is going to appear during the early ’80s, and he 
listed several possibilities including uploading more weapons on our 
Poseidon SLBMs and accelerating B–52/ALCM conversions. Secretary 
Brown responded by noting that he also has other options for alleviat-
ing the early ’80s imbalance, such as deploying SLCMs. Dr. Brzezinski 
suggested that we meet in July to discuss these problems. (TS)
The President then said that he had decided to notify the Allies 
that we are ready to take a leadership role on tactical nuclear forces. He 
said that we have told our Allies that we will try to accommodate their 
political needs and will try to get them to support each other. These 
points will be made to Chancellor Schmidt in the upcoming visit. (TS)
4 Reference is to Rowland Evans and Robert Novak, “The Chiefs Knock SALT,” 
Washington Post, June 4, 1979, p. A27. In the article, Evans and Novak referred to a March 
12 memorandum from the Joint Chiefs of Staff to Secretary of Defense Brown requesting 
that he send it to President Carter. The memorandum, dated March 16, is in Foreign Rela-
tions, 1969–1976, vol. XXXIII, SALT II, 1972–1980, Documnet 236. According to a June 12 
memorandum from Ermarth to Brzezinski, “Harold apparently decided not to send the 
JCS memo. His office told me ’not to worry; Harold is taking care of this by himself.”’ 
(Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 54, SALT: 
3/79)
5 See footnote 3, Document 140.
