Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
1083
President Carter said that Argentina had promised to ratify the
Tlatelolco Treaty soon. Although they have said this before, they had
sent a message this month indicating they are getting ready to do so.3
The U.S. Congress had passed a law on nuclear energy, which
clearly spells out the U.S. position in providing nuclear fuel with cer-
tain safeguards.4 President Carter said his visit to Brazil would be used
to explain our position fully; he was afraid that Brazil may not have
completely understood it. We believed it was relatively easy to coop-
erate in ways which will provide nuclear power and at the same time
eliminate the danger of weapon production.
Perez said that during his conversations with Geisel (November
1977) he expressed solidarity with U.S. policy. Geisel was upset, and
took the position that one could not keep Brazil from doing the things
that the U.S. has already done. Perez told him that whatever the U.S.
has already done, the world cannot afford unrestrained proliferation. It
was because of aspirations in this area, Perez said, that he had pro-
posed a multinational Latin American reprocessing center, under the
auspices of OLADE or SELA, as a way of overcoming jealousies and
satisfying needs. Brazil, of course, was also worried about Argentina.
Geisel said that first he wanted to talk to President Carter, then he
would talk to the GOV about the multinational center proposal.
President Carter said that we have tried the reprocessing route and
have found it unsatisfactory. The International Nuclear Fuel Cycle
Study which will be completed soon will probably recommend re-
gional centers under international safeguards, precisely to overcome
national sensitivities. He said he expected that the study would find
that reprocessing is simply not a necessary part of a nuclear energy
system. He expressed the view that both Germany and France realize
the problems and would probably not offer the same kind of arrange-
ments now that they did then.
President Carter said that common expressions of concern would
be useful in drawing the distinction between legitimate desires for
peaceful use of nuclear energy and arms production. He also noted that
Brazil has thorium, and this is a promising source of fuel which would
avoid the plutonium problem. Geisel is discussing the use of thorium,
and this may be an avenue out of the present problem. Perhaps, the
3 Ambassador Aja Espil informed Nye on March 22 that Argentina “has every in-
tention of ratifying the Treaty of Tlatelolco, as President Videla committed his country to
do in conversations with President Carter and Secretary Vance. The Ambassador said
this welcome development would take place soon, noting that the United States should
have no doubt about Argentina’s intentions.” (Telegram 76482 to Buenos Aires, March
24; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780130–0734)
4 Carter signed the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Act on March 10. See Document 366.
