1957 1333 imprisoned Americans. At other times he seemed have taken ­attitude this agreement would not be carried out and Americans released unless and until there were further political concessions by my govt on matters of interest to his govt. I could not but interpret in this sense statements he had made with regard improvement relations between us being a factor in timing of release those prisoneers. At other times he seemed take attitude because of alleged violation of agreement by US with respect Chinese in US, his authorites in retaliation were refusing imple­ ment agreement with regard Americans still in prison in his country. Continued he had spoken of press release my govt Jan 29 and had termed it groundless charges. I would not take time go thru that press release—seemed to me be most sober, careful presentation facts this matter. Instead trying dismiss it as groundless charges I asked him show me single misstatement fact in release. This not just my opinion or opinion my govt. He would recall and had probably noted with respect Chinese in US, following that release, Feb 2 spokesman GOI stated Indian Embassy Washington had found no case of any proved obstruction any Chinese in US desiring return his country; that while few cases alleged obstruction been drawn attention Indian Embassy, in no case had it proved true. 12. I continued, he had said here this morning his govt had not received any complaint obstruction of departure of any American his country. He knew and I knew Govt UK had not and could not make statement supporting that allegation such as Indian Govt made sup­ porting statement I had made here this morning. To go into any further detail would simply obscure these fundamental undeniable facts. 13. Wang replied, in my statement I had termed most fundamental issue between two sides question civilians. In this regard, greater part this problem already resolved as result efforts made by Chinese Govt. That was to say, most of Americans or practically all Americans ­desiring depart this country to return US had already been enabled freely do so. Number people who had done so not in neighborhood several scores or several hundred but more than 1000 done so. If I wanted say question civilians sole issue involved in improvement relations, it could be said good basis already established this respect. What US trying do was pre­ sent this matter as only concerning few criminals—this what he could not agree with. They felt that problems existing between our two coun­ tries concerned kind of issues which arise between two great powers and are of great consequence to humanity. If we failed see problems from this point view, it would seem be what people call losing sight of forest when only seeing single tree. If anybody going present relations between two countries as only involving question of handful criminals, can only say it making game of these talks, with pretext of question few criminals. If we were to take that course he afraid people would have
