Covert and Overt Operations Q (Holloway): Noting that one of the reasons for their visit (and one of their charges in general) was to explore what interfaces (with a future joint task force) would be necessary. He asked for our view on this (while noting that he felt that such Agency-JTF interface would be essential). A (McMahon): He described both the routine interface with DoD and the specific involvement on this mission. —[2 lines not declassified] —He also described that our terrorist branch works regularly with the Delta force both in terms of providing information and in training. —For the rescue operation he noted that we expanded our liaison with the Delta force in order to provide training and logistical support, and that we provided [less than 1 line not declassified] liaison to the Pentagon for planning assistance. —Further on the rescue support he noted that we virtually opened our warehouses as far as paramilitary stocks, operational devices, equipment, etc. were concerned in order to ensure that the team had everything it needed for advance training. Q (Holloway): He advised that the Panel’s preliminary view was that any future, permanent Task Force would be a field organization and would include the Delta force, dedicated transport, some Navy personnel and equipment (e.g. SEALS, possibly a submarine) and a command liaison cell in Washington (most likely in the JCS special operations area). He wondered how we thought the interface would, or should, be carried out in this case. A (DCI): He stressed that there are a number of areas for interface, at different levels, and that such interface with the Agency is essential. —He noted that future operations involving this JTF would be run as a military operation; but he mentioned that there is a need for the incorporation of clandestine skills [3 lines not declassified]. Holloway then made the following comment: —He said the Panel had discussed (but they had not yet reached any firm resolution) the fact that the JTF would most likely be a military organization. —The JTF was to be prepared for an NSC decision that a given operation was to be a DoD responsibility as opposed to (a) a negotiation approach to the problem (Holloway referred to this as a State responsibility); or (b) a clandestine approach to the problem (Holloway referred to this as an area of CIA responsibility). —i.e. their focus to date was to determine how, when the Chiefs were told to execute an operation, they could best do it. Q (Manor): He asked whether the initial detection by the Iranians had been picked up by their radar and whether it was a C–130 or a helo. A (DCI): It was a visual sighting of a C–130; it was not a radar detection.
