1979  585
126.	 Memorandum From Fritz Ermarth of the National Security 
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National  
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, April 26, 1979
SUBJECT
The President’s M–X Basing Decision (U)
My present understanding is that the DOD will offer the Presi-
dent two options which it regards as acceptable: MPS and “Enhanced 
DIAD”. The latter may be called “Variant TRIAD” or some such, but 
it amounts to the same thing: foregoing any rebased ICBM and put-
ting the strategic force modernization effort into the sea-­based and air-­
breathing force elements. (TS)
The DOD will recommend rejecting several alternatives as unac-
ceptable: All air-­mobile combinations will be rejected because the 200 
missile force is vastly too expensive, while smaller forces sized to a 
reasonable budget have much too little capability for the still very 
large outlay required. The truck/land mobile option boils down, evi-
dently, to the road mobile version. I’m not sure how the argument will 
be made, but would expect it to be rejected because a) it depends on 
strategic warning when the threat of strategic surprise is too high for 
comfort, and b) the missile must be small (i.e., 4–5 RVs) to fit on a 
road-­mobile truck. Off-­road mobile truck, which could physically be 
designed to carry a larger missile (10 RVs), is probably out because it 
is just too big and destructive to operate off government land, even in 
crisis. (TS)
As I say, these are informed expectations, not firm advanced notice 
of what is coming. Harold Brown and Bill Perry will probably put their 
own spin on the recommendations and the analysis of each option. 
Moreover, the plan calls for them to make their recommendations only 
after the PRC has reacted to the full set of options. Hence, some cheap 
version of the air mobile option, e.g., 50–70 missiles in aircraft, 100–150 
in silos, might be presented as “barely acceptable” under pressure and 
over the bitter opposition of the professionals. (TS)
Thinking through the politics of this decision is important not only 
because the President wants to come through it politically and wants it 
to help SALT, but the credibility of the decision is itself important to the 
national security, allied confidence, Soviet respect, etc. (TS)
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Defense/Security, 
Ermarth, Box 6, MX Missiles: 4/79. Top Secret; Eyes Only. Sent for information.
