El Salvador 595 recounted his conversation with Ambassador Kalljarvi of last fall in which he had made a request for assistance from the United States.5 This assistance was now more urgently needed than ever. El Salvador’s borders and coasts were wide open to anyone who desired to penetrate them. For example, not a single boat was available with which to patrol the coast. Mr. Stewart said that in this connection, he wished to tell President Lemus that the question of possible military threats against the countries of Central American from external sources had been discussed prior to his coming here and that he had Mr. Rubottom’s authority to assure him that the United States, working through the OAS machinery, would come to the assistance of any Latin American government so threatened. Our assistance would be immediate and more than fully adequate. On this point, President Lemus could rest assured. Mr. Stewart then explained at some length the problems involved in concluding a mutual assistance bilateral, emphasizing the congressional aspects, etc.6 He told the President that we were now exploring the feasibility of utilizing other channels through which it might be possible to provide certain types of assistance to the public security forces. He pointed out that the Embassy had, some two weeks ago, requested the Minister of Defense to provide it with information concerning the National Police, the Guardia Nacional, the Customs Police, and the Treasury Police. This information would be of great assistance to the Embassy in preparing recommendations on such a possible program. The President reached in a folder and took out the Embassy’s Aide Memoire to the Minister of Defense,7 which he had obviously been holding. He telephoned to the Minister and asked him to prepare a reply on an urgent basis for his prior review.8 He reiterated his hope that some assistance would be forthcoming, repeating that it was impossible for his government to do all that had to be done in the social field and elsewhere without outside assistance. He explained what he hoped to accomplish with the new development project at Metalio. He said he knew that this would not solve the campesino problem, but it could serve as an example of what could be done, an example to the 5 For Lemus’ request of November, 20, 1959, see Document ES–17. 6 By airgram A-85, May 18, 1960, the Department of State instructed the Embassy at San Salvador that “current U.S. policy is directed toward economic development and utilization of national resources toward this end, deemphasizing unrealistic military expenditures.” It suggested ICA expansion of the public safety program in El Salvador including coastal and border patrols. (716.5–MSP/5–1860) 7 Not found in Department of State files. 8 Lemus handed the Salvadoran reply to Downs on June 16, 1960. The memorandum of their conversation at that time states that Lemus agreed to a suggestion by Downs that El Salvador might buy one or two coast guard boats from the United States, if they became available. (ARA/OAP Files, Lot 64 D 16, “Political International-General: El Salvador, 1960”)
