946
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
As an outcome of INFCE, we look forward to a reasonably bal-
anced technical analysis of fuel cycle issues in the final INFCE report
in February 1980. But we do not expect to achieve a formal new in-
ternational regime under which governments are committed to a set
of norms and rules corresponding to our policy preferences. Rather,
alongside the INFCE process, we hope to achieve a growing informal
consensus among the major industrial countries on a set of general
principles for nuclear commerce and fuel cycle management that can
serve as a guide for national policies. To reach even an informal under-
standing, we will have to make some compromises. We also believe
that such a consensus among suppliers may evoke a strong negative re-
action on the part of many developing countries, although we are
trying to bring them into the consensus as well.
We have begun to develop certain illustrative elements of the con-
sensus we hope to achieve. These include strictly limiting and multina-
tionalizing new enrichment and reprocessing plants; using plutonium
only for research, development, and deployment in breeders and ad-
vanced thermal reactors; no recycling of plutonium in current genera-
tion thermal reactors; and pacing construction of any new reprocessing
plants to meet only breeder and advanced reactor requirements and to
avoid stockpiling of plutonium. We have also encouraged multina-
tional safeguarded interim spent fuel repositories.
We hope that restraints of these kinds can be made acceptable on
the basis of an evolutionary principle: that is, that various nuclear tech-
nologies and facilities may be transferred to developing countries but
only when their energy needs and electric grids would support such
transfers. However, we expect that a number of developing countries
will resist this approach because they want complete access now to all
nuclear technologies and will resent in principle a formula that dis-
criminates between states on the basis of level of development.
In the near term, we will have to compromise on some of our illus-
trative elements in relation to the advanced countries. In particular,
West Germany, Japan and Canada want to pursue, or to retain the op-
tion for, national enrichment and reprocessing programs. Winning
their agreement to place such sensitive facilities under multinational
auspices will require efforts that continue beyond the conclusion of
INFCE. Also, West Germany and Belgium (and possibly Japan) are not
likely to be dissuaded from their programs for research and develop-
ment for thermal recycle of plutonium, although they may agree not to
enlarge such programs for at least a decade.
To reach a consensus on fuel cycle issues, we believe that we will
have to move beyond our present case-by-case consideration of ap-
provals of retransfers of US-supplied fuel for reprocessing because this
confronts our nuclear partners with uncertainties they believe they
