476 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX letter re West Bank/Gaza minus clause re December 17, 1978 date (State 287408 and State 287766).7 2. I then went through the talking points provided ref B in some detail, noting West Bank/Gaza letter which I had read to him does contain timetable for moving to self-government and redeployment of Israeli forces. We recognize that period envisaged in draft letter is longer than Sadat or we desired, but emphasized that it does not preclude elections before end of interim withdrawal. Much as we appreciate Sadat’s desire for precise timetable, I pointed out that this is objectively not possible. Camp David frameworks underscore relationship between Egyptian/Israeli Treaty and West Bank/Gaza negotiations, but as I was sure he would agree, they establish no requirement re timing of specific steps. To delay interim withdrawal, as Sadat proposed, would simply mean Israel will insist that West Bank/Gaza elections be delayed beyond end of 1979. I reminded him of how much has in fact been achieved in establishing a practical relationship between the two sets of negotiations, pointing out that this is more than we had thought possible. While many Israelis may want to go slow on West Bank/ Gaza, treaty package creates built-in process which will require early negotiations. As he knew, USG from President Carter on down have interest in moving expeditiously and Sadat has our commitment to remain involved as full party. USG intends to make major effort, as it did after Camp David, to support treaty package and Egypt throughout Arab world. I pointed out that actual progress which will follow ratification of Egyptian/Israeli peace treaty will have more impact on Camp David critics than any treaty language. 3. Re Sadat’s proposal on Gaza, we understand it and appreciate his desire for Egyptian presence. As he knew, however, Camp David Framework has no specific provision for Gaza and we do not want to appear to be attempting to split the Palestinians by handling Gaza separately from West Bank. Possibility that Sadat can achieve what he wants re Gaza once negotiating process starts, I noted, cannot be ruled out. Re timing of phases of withdrawal, I pointed out that early beginning of normalization, including exchange of ambassadors, will be an incentive to Israel to accelerate withdrawal. I also gave him view of Department’s legal advisor that proposed letter from President Carter re West Bank/Gaza has same binding effect as an exchange of letters between Sadat and Begin. All things considered, therefore, I hoped that Sadat could accede to President Carter’s request to accept the treaty package as it stands. 4. Sadat heard me out, but was clearly unhappy with the substance of President Carter’s letter and my supplementary comments on it. (He 7 See Document 131.
