800
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
challenge to our interests but also because it has become a symbol of
what is perceived in this country as Soviet expansionism.
This led to a discussion of whether the Afghanistani problem can
somehow be solved. I explained to him what we mean by the “transi-
tional arrangements” designed to create a government in Afghanistan
which is not hostile to the Soviet Union but which is not dependent
for its survival on the presence of a Soviet occupation army.
Dobrynin maintained that we are in effect insisting that Babrak
Karmal has to go, whereas the Soviet Union is willing to solve the
problem on the basis of withdrawal of Soviet forces, once an Afghan
army that is capable of sustaining Karmal has been created. “Why not
accept then a solution based on the principle of neutrality and non-
intereference?” he asked.
I pointed out that Babrak Karmal is part of the problem that needs
to be solved and hence cannot be the solution. To govern he has to
have a Soviet army of occupation. Moreover, to govern without Soviet
troops, there would have to be a massive and inevitably brutal counter-
insurgency operation which would further poison U.S.-Soviet relations.
This is why it is in our mutual interest to try to find an accommodation
soon, perhaps through more extensive explorations of what a transi-
tional arrangement would involve. If such a solution could be found,
it would be a real breakthrough, making possible rapid progress on
other issues, notably arms control.
Dobrynin then asked me about the prospects for SALT. I told him
that the President and the Secretary of State are fully committed to it and
that we will seek its ratification. However, (1) if the present situation
in Afghanistan continues, ratification will be difficult; (2) if there is a
massive Soviet counter-insurgency after the Olympics, ratification will
become even more difficult because public emotions here will be further
aroused; (3) but if there is some genuine progress on Afghanistan,
pointing toward the withdrawal of all Soviet troops and involving
perhaps some transitional arrangements, then the public would wel-
come SALT and ratification would be facilitated.
I added that the public wishes a firm policy toward the Soviet
Union but also desires accommodation with the Soviet Union. It is our
task to make that accommodation possible and I hoped that Dobrynin
would impress the Soviet leaders with this thought.
He tried to discuss TNF and the Middle East with me but I told
him that TNF had been discussed with Christopher, that on the Middle
East I did not have anything new to say, and that in any case, I knew
that he would be having a more formal and comprehensive discussion
