896
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
tailed discussions. Following Nye’s introductory remarks Morokhov
delivered a lengthy statement (para 3 and 4).
3. Morokhov mentioned Brezhnev’s May 297 call for maximum
non-proliferation effort and identified the following areas for joint
US–USSR consideration:
—Enhancement of NPT; suggested joint action to encourage ad-
herence by several conspicuous non-parties;
—Promotion of full scope safeguards as condition of supply, in-
cluding efforts to secure such a condition on part of potential exporters
of source material; (there was discussion of how to deal with French on
this question);
—Moratorium on sensitive transfers—Morokhov said USSR sup-
ports and stressed that fuel services should be offered; USSR can ex-
pand enrichment capacity;
—Agreement among exporters on sanctions; suppliers should con-
sult if recipient defaults on IAEA obligation including exploding nu-
clear device; exports should be halted and issue raised at IAEA and
UN; USSR also ready to consider other sanctions;
—Limits on stockpiles of weapons usable material by requiring
spent fuel return to supplier or to regional center; could be additional
provision in London guidelines;
—Multinational centers for spent fuel storage and reprocessing;
—Regular bilateral and multilateral supplier consultations espe-
cially in cases of large transfers or when major new assistance is under-
taken; also suppliers could exchange trigger list information;
—Strengthening IAEA safeguards; mentioned carrying out ex-
perts’ recommendation of safeguards evaluation unit, and urged
stronger US support; said USSR puzzled by US “passivity” on ensuring
effective agreements with EURATOM and Japan; suggested encour-
aging NPT parties to conclude agreements, and discussed SAGSI;
—Promotion of physical security convention; USSR studying US
draft;8
—Suggestion of US–USSR declaration to be signed at top levels
calling for universal nonproliferation regime, supporting peaceful in-
ternational nuclear cooperation not contributing to explosive spread,
full scope safeguards and additional NPT adherence and other supplier
group type issues on sensitive transfers, sanctions, physical security;
support for IAEA safeguards. Morokhov stressed that list of topics was
suggestive only; essential element is joint character of declaration at
highest levels.
4. Morokhov concluded statement by saying INFCE proposal will
contribute to nonproliferation and USSR has no objection to pro-
gram. They will consider participation of Soviet experts in technical
discussions.
7 See “Address by General Secretary Brezhnev on French Television [Extract],” May
29, 1977, in Documents on Disarmament, 1977, pp. 357–358.
8 Not found.
