732  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
intention settle their disputes peacefully and refrain from threat resort 
to force attain their policy objectives.
F. I proposed this be expressly applicable to Taiwan area, as well 
as elsewhere. I felt then, as now, if threat resort to force were removed 
elsewhere but allowed remain Taiwan area, such declaration would be 
of no real purpose.
G. Finally, I proposed declaration make clear neither side was, 
by subscribing to it, prejudicing its inherent right self-­defense. Since 
January 12 we have been considering emended draft, which like my 
previous drafts, was consistent with all these propositions. At our last 
meeting you indicated you were prepared accept this draft, with excep­
tion of last of my propositions, reference to self-­defense.
H. You have stated in our recent meetings, and your government 
has declared publicly, it does not object to principle self-­defense, either 
individual or collective. I will pass over without comment grudging 
manner in which this admission made, reluctance particularly surpris­
ing in country which is party to collective defense arrangements its 
own, and which even now has troops on foreign territory in defiance 
United Nations in what it claims to have been exercise of this very right.
I. You have stated, and your government has declared publicly, 
your only objection is to exercise of this right by US in Taiwan area. 
I should like to ask you for moment to consider self-­defense clause in its 
proper context. That is, in its relationship to other propositions embod­
ied in our declaration. This relationship is, I think, perfectly clear in my 
amended draft January 12.
J. Taken in context, implication of self-­defense clause is clearly con­
tingent. What it says in effect, is this: if either party should, in viola­
tion of this declaration initiate hostilities, or if either party should be 
attacked by any other party, then party which has been attacked may 
defend itself.
K. Thus placed in context, which is only way in which I have asked 
you accept it, self-­defense clause not only does not conflict with other 
propositions embodied in proposed declaration [garble] corollary and 
supplement to these other propositions. It is completely reciprocal. It is 
applicable, with complete reciprocity, to Taiwan area.
L. Frankly, Mr. Ambassador, if we take self-­defense clause in its 
proper context, I see only one thing which could render it objection­
able. It would be objectionable, certainly, if one side were entering into 
declaration with false intention of nevertheless initiating use hostilities. 
It would be objectionable, certainly, from point view of whichever side 
was insincere renouncing use force to settle our differences.
M. I am reluctant believe all during four long months we have 
spent discussing this proposition there has not been any real intent on
