National Security Policy  587
intended mission, but we believe it could represent a significant step 
forward in Soviet bomber design. Preliminary analysis indicates 
BOUNDER to be powered by four turbojet engines. The use of con­
ventional fuels would give it a range marginal for intercontinental 
bombing. The possibility for development of BOUNDER with a more 
advanced propulsion system exists, and the design intent for a nuclear-­
powered vehicle cannot be excluded at this time. However, present 
information is inadequate to permit an estimate of BOUNDER’s prob­
able development.
147. Our evidence also continues to support the existence of one or 
more other prototypes of new or improved long-­range bombers. Past 
experience cautions that existing prototypes may represent competitive 
designs. The Soviets may not yet have evaluated such prototypes in 
relation to each other or to their missile programs. Such evaluation will 
have an important bearing on the future strength and composition of 
Long Range Aviation.
148. We continue to project Soviet heavy bomber and tanker 
strength for mid-1960 as lying within the range of 100 to 200 aircraft. 
The high side reflects a Soviet option to produce additional aircraft of 
BISON and perhaps BEAR types, and perhaps to introduce a few of a 
new heavy bomber into operational units. The low side reflects their 
option to forego a further build-­up in heavy bombers through mid-
1960, relying primarily on their one-­way medium bomber capability 
against the US for at least a little longer. Our estimates of trends in 
Long Range Aviation beyond 1960 are more uncertain, but reflect our 
belief that the USSR will probably introduce new or improved inter­
continental bombers during the period of this estimate. Should Soviet 
planners desire a large force of heavy bombers and tankers, there is 
no question that they could have five or six hundred BISONs, BEARS, 
and new heavy bombers in units by mid-1963. As indicated in the table 
below, however, it seems to us more likely that the heavy bomber and 
tanker force will remain considerably smaller than this—­say, about two 
or three hundred, including some of new types.
149. Intercontinental ballistic missiles. We believe that Soviet plan­
ners intend to acquire a sizable ICBM operational capability at the ear­
liest practicable date. However, we have insufficient evidence to judge 
the magnitude and pace of a Soviet program to produce and deploy 
ICBMs. Considerable preparations for a build-­up of operational ICBM 
capabilities could already have been made without detection by intelli­
gence, as implied by Khrushchev’s recent statement that the production 
of ICBMs has been “successfully set up.” In the light of such indirect 
evidence as exists, we have considered those factors which would affect 
an operational ICBM build-­up, including the Soviet capacity to pro­
duce missiles and associated equipment, and concurrently to complete 
launching facilities, establish logistic lines, and train operational units.
