Human Rights 587 democratic institutions. (The policy to date, it was noted, had been implemented with prime focus on first category rights); b) A clearer statement of the correlation, or lack of, between economic and social and civil and political rights and how U.S. policy could promote both. (It was noted that countries which respected civil and political liberties did not necessarily promote economic and social rights); c) An evaluation of U.S. obligations under the proposed New International Economic Order;2 d) A clear statement on how U.S. military sales and aid impacted on human rights; and e) A clear definition of the kinds of police equipment the U.S. was sending abroad and how this impacted on human rights. —The maintenance of a tough human rights stance toward major violators, in particular, Argentina and Nicaragua (where the USG is perceived as having backed down), the Philippines, South Korea (where the President’s forthcoming visit was strongly criticized, particularly in the absence of any known commitments by the South Korean Government to improve its record prior to or in conjunction with the visit),3 South Africa, El Salvador, Guatemala, Rhodesia and Indonesia. In the case of the USSR and CSCE, the following recommendations were made: the designation at an early stage of an Ambassador and a task force for Madrid4 to give focus to the forthcoming meeting; the inclusion of human rights questions on the summit agenda; the undertaking of efforts to improve phone and mail communication with the USSR; a review of the programs broadcast by Radio Liberty, Radio Free Europe and the Voice of America to ensure their adequate reflection of human rights concerns; and the adoption by the U.S. Embassy of a more open attitude toward contacts with unofficial Soviets. —At the UN, the appointment of an individual of stature and expertise to represent the U.S. at the UN Human Rights Commission and other human rights bodies; and a more responsive position on Southern Africa, economic rights and the human rights implications of the NIEO. —The revision of immigration policies to make them less restrictive geographically and more responsive in political asylum cases. In addition, the facilitation of the granting of visas to communist party members for visits. —More outreach: NGO’s requested that the Department inform them more quickly about changes in human rights conditions and con- 2 See footnote 3, Document 94. 3 Following the Tokyo Economic Summit, the President was scheduled to fly to Seoul, South Korea, to meet with President Park and Prime Minister Choi. The visit took place June 29–July 1. 4 See footnote 6, Document 186.
