586  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
bomber production, the USSR’s plant capacity suitable for production 
of large aircraft has been considerably enlarged over the last few years, 
and there is some evidence to suggest that several plants are preparing 
to produce large bombers or transports.
144. Research and development in new bomber types has contin­
ued and we believe that it will be intensively pursued throughout the 
period of this estimate. Considering the demonstrated level of Soviet 
technology in such fields as aircraft propulsion and aerodynamics, and 
the normal development of these capabilities, we have estimated that 
within the next few years the USSR could probably place into oper­
ational units: (a) improved versions of the BISON and BADGER, at 
any time; (b) a new subsonic heavy bomber with range and other per­
formance characteristics somewhat better than those of an improved 
BISON, in 1959 or 1960; (c) a new medium bomber with supersonic 
“dash” capabilities and a range approximating that of an improved 
BADGER, in 1960 or 1961.
145. Since none of these aircraft types would add substantially to 
Soviet capabilities for two-­way intercontinental operations, we have 
reasoned that the USSR might proceed directly to more advanced types, 
such as a heavy bomber powered by high-­energy chemical fuel, capable 
of supersonic speed and high altitude, or possibly a subsonic nuclear-­
powered aircraft capable of long endurance, even at low altitudes. We 
continue to estimate that some aircraft of either or both these types 
could probably be in operational units by mid-1963. We also believe 
that within the next few years the USSR could fly an airborne nuclear 
testbed, with at least one nuclear power unit providing useful thrust 
during some phase of the flight.16 The attainment of a nuclear propul­
sion system for operational use in supersonic aircraft would probably 
require a long test and development program extending beyond the 
period of this estimate.17
146. Recent evidence of Soviet developmental efforts includes the 
observation at Moscow of a new bomber, designated BOUNDER, of 
large size and heavy weight, with a modified delta-­wing configuration 
apparently designed for supersonic flight. With the limited informa­
tion available, it has not been possible to determine the BOUNDER’s 
16 The Assistant Chief of Naval Operations for Intelligence, Department of the Navy, 
and the Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff, believe that the USSR could fly such a 
testbed during 1959. The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, believes that an 
aircraft nuclear propulsion system could now be undergoing flight tests in a prototype 
airframe. [Footnote is in the original.]
17 See SNIE 11–58, “Possible Soviet Long Range Bomber Development, 1958–1962,” 
4 March 1958 (SECRET), and SNIE 11–7–58, “Strength and Composition of the Soviet 
Long Range Bomber Force,” 5 June 1958 (TOP SECRET). For estimated performance char­
acteristics of Soviet long-­range bombers for operational use to 1961, see Annex, Table 6. 
[Footnote is in the original.]
