1979  613
attacker might seek to pin down the missile force in its initial location 
by blocking tracks and then seek to find and strike the real missiles. 
However, this scenario is not very plausible, because given the warning 
and destruction of the precursor SLBM attack the US would probably 
be assumed ready to use its force before losing it.
Dr. Brzezinski asked if the heavy missile was being used in this con-
cept? Perry noted that this basing concept does not prescribe any par-
ticular missile size. As noted before, however, it would cost $1B more 
up front to go with the smaller missile because more of them would be 
required.
John White asked whether this concept might not cost a lot more 
than MPS because of the excavation, track laying, etc.
Bill Perry answered that his analysis was rough but suggested a 
range of $2–5B in extra costs, with his best guess being $3B. Harold 
Brown noted that DOD’s feeling for cost was based on a lot of study 
and field experiments on the underground trench. The AF, it was noted, 
had done extensive work on trench design that was directly applicable 
to this concept.
Spurgeon Keeny asked why the rail connections had to be trenches. 
Could they not be on the surface? He was told that this would be possi-
ble though it might raise additional security concerns.
Frank Press commented that this idea looks much better than MPS 
on verification, worse on security, worse on environment, and better on 
survivability. He observed that environmental impact would be severe 
because of large land areas excluded from public access.
Harold Brown noted that this would depend on where the sys-
tem was located. It could be located in military reservations such as 
bombing ranges from which the public was excluded anyway. Dr. Perry 
noted that DOD had about 38,000 square miles of suitable land, the AF 
about 14,000. Randy Jayne asked whether high water tables—­in some 
locations—­had been taken into account. Dr. Perry said the AF had stud-
ied such matters extensively with respect to MPS and trenches. Gen 
Jones noted that laying the track above ground would reduce environ-
mental impact if that proved to be the major problem. Harold Brown 
said that continuous fences along the trench would be required to keep 
the public away from nuclear devices.
Frank Press continued his comments observing that while a 
launcher on its side might be easier to verify than a vertical launcher, 
Soviet deployment of this concept would worry us. We would be con-
cerned about extra missiles lurking in or stored for introduction into 
the system. Harold Brown asked whether this basing concept created a 
problem in this respect or merely called attention to the threat of extra 
Soviet missiles, a threat that already exists?
