3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 398 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI 121. Memorandum of Conversation1 New York, May 31, 1978, 5:20–7:35 p.m. SUBJECT SALT, Cyprus PARTICIPANTS U.S. Secretary of State Cyrus R. Vance Ambassador Paul C. Warnke Ambassador Malcolm Toon Mr. Reginald Bartholomew Mr. Wm. D. Krimer, Interpreter USSR Foreign Minister A.A. Gromyko Deputy Foreign Minister G.M. Korniyenko Ambassador A.F. Dobrynin Ambassador V.G. Makarov Mr. V.M. Sukhodrev, Interpreter SALT The Secretary led off the conversation by addressing the issue of new types of ICBMs and SLBMs. He said that we had reviewed the three variants contained in the paper Gromyko had given President Carter. None of those variants was acceptable to us. As the President had indicated in his response, we believed that there were two valid alternative proposals on the negotiating table concerning this issue, between which a choice should be made. The first alternative applied to the Protocol which, as the President had indicated, is of relatively brief duration. Under that proposal there would be a ban on the deployment and testing of any new type of ICBM during that relatively brief period. The other alternative provided for one exemption from that ban for each side for the period of the entire Treaty through 1985, rather than the term of the Protocol. We believed, however, that if this alternative was followed, then it should be such that either side would have a choice in determining whether it wanted to test and deploy a new type of ICBM with a single reentry vehicle or with MIRVs. We believed that these were the two alternatives between which a choice should be made. 1 Source: Department of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Special Adviser to the Secretary (S/MS) on Soviet Affairs Marshall Shulman—Jan 21, 77–Jan 19, 81, Lot 81D109, Box 8, Gromyko to US, 5/26–27, 1978. Secret; Nodis. Drafted by Krimer on June 2. The meeting took place at the U.S. Mission to the United Nations. An unknown hand made minor edits to this version of the memorandum.
