of all Delegations not to create the impression that the Conference was a
debt-collecting agency. Again, the American, British and Japanese, having
more at stake than the other participating governments, took the lead in this
work and evolved most of the plans which were submitted for consideration
looking to early settlement of this problem. The Nishihara loans, as might
well have been expected, created difficulties from the beginning. Next to
rates of surtaxes, the Japanese displayed most interest in the question of
debts. The Nishihara loans constituted the bulk of the Japanese loans and
the Japanese Delegation diligently pursued a policy of having all these
loans included in any consolidation scheme which might be evolved.
In general the Japanese were disposed to favor a long period of time at a
low rate of interest. The American Delegation, at the very outset of the
Conference, was importuned by numerous American creditors of the
Chinese Government, who had either themselves come to Peking or sent
representatives to be present during the Conference, to make provision for
the payment of the more than $30,000,000 gold, due them for money loaned
and materials furnished the Chinese Government. A sympathetic hearing
was invariably given to these gentlemen and on many occasions they
availed themselves of an opportunity to submit statements of their views. In
all schemes proposed for the Consolidation of Debts, efforts were made by
the American Delegation to safeguard the interests of the American
creditors, and while no definite plan has yet been agreed upon and while it
will be impossible to evolve a scheme which will be satisfactory to all, it is
felt that the American creditors, except in one or two isolated cases, realize
the obstacles that have faced the Delegates and the futility of hoping for a
solution which will speedily and at the same time satisfactorily clear up the
debt situation in China. This question proved more vexatious than any
other, at least so far as the American Delegation was concerned, and it is a
matter of great regret that the impossibility of negotiating the interim surtax
treaty has thus far prevented the adoption of a plan by which all of the debts
of the Chinese Government, both foreign and domestic, would be liquidated
in due course of time. This is a matter which must necessarily be deferred
until the Conference renews its work. It should be remarked that some of
the American creditors voiced great disappointment that any consolidation
plan which gave promise of acceptance contemplated putting the domestic
debts on a parity with the foreign debts. They considered this unfair, since
