886
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
If you approve any of these recommendations, we would like to
announce on Saturday.5
2. Food Security Reserve. All of your advisers believe that we should
try to use the present situation to reinforce our previous request to the
Congress to establish the Food Security Reserve.6 It would not increase
the federal budget. It is a long-sought assurance of US readiness to re-
spond to food crises and to maintain our food aid to needy countries
when there is a short US grain crop. The Reserve will not work to de-
press US wheat prices because releases from it are restricted to situa-
tions of severe shortages.
Establishment of this reserve will not generally be seen as fulfilling
your pledge to “increase amounts of grain devoted to alleviation of
hunger in poor countries”; it would simply assure that we will be able
to meet our minimum food aid commitments, whatever may be agri-
cultural conditions.
3. PL–480. All of the agencies concerned, except OMB, agree that
increased PL–480 food aid should be part of our disposition of the
excess grain. It is important that this not be seen as reversion to the dis-
carded policies of using PL–480 as a dumping ground; therefore the in-
crement should be limited to clear cases of need, especially humani-
tarian programs and food imports that will not displace domestic
production in developing countries. In order to avoid displacing grain
exports by other countries whose cooperation we need in imple-
menting the Soviet embargo, the increase in PL–480 should not radi-
cally exceed recent levels of about 6.8 million tons. Any PL–480 in-
crease should be largely in food other than wheat, because wheat is the
primary grain export of these other countries.
I believe that the 800,000 ton add-on proposed by the agencies,
which would get us back to the recent level of 6.8 million tons, meets
these criteria. Most of it is corn. Such an expanded program can be
managed without sacrificing the PL–480 emphasis on development
that you have directed. It is true that sizeable PL–480 reserves already
are planned, but these reserves are for unforeseen emergencies, not for
programmed needs such as proposed by the agencies.
The agencies illustrate the possible uses of this additional 800,000
tons for FY 1980 ($160 million) and FY 1981 ($200 million) by listing
specific possible Title I and II FY 1980 and 1981 programs; they also
suggest an FY 1981 effort to help LDCs build up national stocks, which
I believe makes good sense.
The agencies’ attached memorandum lists two other options
which none of them recommends: PL–480 aid for Israel, which would
5 January 19.
6 See Document 260.
