3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
304
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
The Secretary told Dobrynin that we would call for Israeli with-
drawal from Lebanon and the establishment of a UN peacekeeping
force in the area to stabilize the situation. He said we hoped the Leba-
nese would bring the matter to the Security Council, but that we would
consider doing so if they did not.
Dobrynin replied that the Soviet position was simply to call for Is-
raeli withdrawal without conditions. He expressed the opinion that the
Lebanese would agree to a peacekeeping force only if it had the concur-
rence of the Syrians. He said that he would keep us informed of any de-
velopment in the Soviet position, and the Secretary said that we would
keep the Soviet Union informed of our plans with regard to the Secu-
rity Council.
On the topic of a comprehensive Middle East settlement, Dobrynin
explained why the Soviets reacted so strongly to the Sadat initiative. He
said they had just succeeded in obtaining Syrian agreement to go to a
Geneva conference when Sadat announced his trip.
HORN OF AFRICA: The Secretary told Dobrynin we were pleased
the Somalis had withdrawn, and that the Ethiopian forces and those
fighting with them had respected the border, but he expressed concern
at recent reports of reprisals in the Ogaden. Dobrynin expressed the
personal view that this might be because of Siad Barre’s support of ir-
regular forces left behind. The Secretary said we were planning to give
support to the UN High Commissioner’s efforts to deal with human
needs in the area, and hoped the Soviets would cooperate. He also in-
formed Dobrynin that the President would be sending Moose as emis-
sary to Siad Barre.
Dobrynin implied that the reduction or withdrawal of Soviet
forces from the area would be less difficult if there were not public
statements to make it seem that this was being done under pressure.
Dobrynin said the Ethiopians had been informed that the Soviets and
Cubans would be very careful not to be involved in Eritrea. When ques-
tioned about the Cuban and Soviet presence on the coast around Assab,
Dobrynin said he had no information, but that he would find out when
he got to Moscow.
Dobrynin made the familiar point about the presence of US forces
in Iran in justifying a Soviet case for a presence in Ethiopia, adding that
the Administration had testified before the Congress that the US mili-
tary presence would go as high as 40,000. The Secretary corrected him
and pointed out that the US has about 1200 uniformed personnel plus
about 6000 civilian contract employees connected with sales of military
equipment. He said that the total US community, including the above,
their dependents, and businessmen, is about 40,000.
In the course of the conversation on the Horn, Dobrynin men-
tioned that the Somalis had recently raised with the Soviet Union the
