1955 485 3. In view publicly stated US attitude toward off-­shore islands and specific reference to “Taiwan area” in paragraph 7 seems to me diffi­ cult construe statement as whole as leaving CHICOMS free attack those islands. While it seems to me preferable include some disclaimer re third parties, could delete this paragraph without weakening statement. 4. It seems to me difficult to enunciate principle that use of force in purely internal matters is not permissible. Police in all countries contin­ uously use force maintain internal order. Whereas we strongly disagree with some of policy objectives internal police use force Communist countries it clearly becomes international matter only when interna­ tional peace, security and justice involved. Test is not whether coun­ try considers matter domestic or international, but rather whether in fact use of force would endanger international peace. In view existence GRC and US treaty relationship thereto there can be no question that use force against GRC constitutes threat to international peace however PRC regards matter. It will be seen that at last meeting I strongly pur­ sued this point with Wang. 5. Implication is no stronger than in original statement I made to Wang. Entire context discussion renunciation force has been willing­ ness discuss “other matters” in these talks if PRC renounced force in satisfactory terms. If this removed there is little left in my negotiating position. We have made clear our refusal discuss any matters involving rights and interest GRC. With different emphasis and of course for opposite reasons Wang has also disclaimed any intent discuss GRC matters with US. 6. and 7. See comments on paragraph 4 above. Entirely concur penultimate paragraph Deptel 1136 to Geneva. Question is formulating a document that accomplishes both purposes of tying them down and appearing reasonable to world if negotiations break on this point. In my opinion draft in Deptel 915 accomplishes former purpose but not latter. Johnson
