be considered as coming within the terms of Article 5 which authorizes an
exception in the case of “extraordinary and abnormal circumstances” in
order to protect the “vital interests” of the country. It is, of course,
understood that the Japanese Government does not wish permanently to
maintain this restriction, but rather wishes to reserve the right to impose it
from time to time. Recognition of any prohibitions or restrictions as coming
under Article 5 should take due account of the fact that their duration “shall
be restricted to that of the causes or circumstances from which they arise”.
The exception claimed by the United States as to the export of helium gas
would doubtless be recognized as properly falling under the 3rd paragraph
of Article 4 which relates to traffic in implements of war, and you are
authorized to agree to its recognition as coming thereunder. Particularly
since the exception of this commodity was agreed to at the time the
convention was signed on November 8, 1927,24 the Department assumes
that no objection will be raised to granting that exception in favor of the
United States. If, however, any questions should be raised as to this
exception, you may state that the Government of the United States desires
to maintain it, and that obviously it does not “prejudicially affect the trade
of other countries” (see Article 6).
A further criterion by which the exceptions claimed under paragraph 2 of
Article 6 may be tested is obviously found in the construction of the terms
of that Article. It is therefore believed that the conference should examine
carefully all such exceptions from that point of view. The Government of
the United States considers that certain exceptions claimed under paragraph
2 are not properly admissible thereunder. In particular, reference is made to
the claims for exception of raw materials, which appear to be essentially
claims designed to effect economic protection by restrictions rather than by
duties. Thus the Polish Government desires to restrict exportation of crude
oil and the Czechoslovak Government of rounded timber.
The second paragraph of Article 6 of the convention only permits
prohibitions or restrictions which “do not prejudicially affect the trade of
other countries”. Restrictions on the exportation of such important raw
materials as crude oil and rounded timber can not be justified in accord with
that principle. It is considered that a large measure of liberty in the
