18
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
perfectly. It was also a question of how to assure that they would get
all the hostages back.
Dr. Brzezinski noted that there [were] some advantages since an
undisciplined mob might very well panic when faced with disciplined
troops. An operation of this nature should be undertaken only if the
hostages were being killed.
Hamilton Jordan noted that they could start killing one person per
day or one person per hour which would put us in a very difficult
position.
Dr. Brzezinski said that the military should be encouraged to refine
this option. If they start killing hostages, we will need to do something.
Stan Turner suggested that we should stage a carrier to the Eastern
Mediterranean.
General Jones noted that we would probably want to have a CVA
in the Persian Gulf.
Hamilton Jordan noted that there would be strong chance that a
third country would observe our movements.
General Jones agreed noting the chances of our being observed in
a commercial airport like Dhahran were very high.
Dr. Brzezinski wondered how quickly the Saudis could react and
transmit the information to Tehran, even if they observed it.
Stan Turner noted that it would be possible to put the refueling
aircraft in Cypress, at Akhatia airbase by prepositioning a carrier and
an LPH in the Eastern Mediterranean with helicopters on board; they
could be much closer to the area of operations.
Secretary Brown generally agreed and said that the way to go in
was to overfly Turkey. That should pose no problem since the Soviets
do it all the time even without permission.
The President said that they should do more work on the plan. To
him it looked more like the Egyptian raid on Cyprus.7
General Jones noted that successful raids are always rehearsed many
times and this [did] not offer an opportunity for detailed preparations,
however, they would go ahead and flesh out the plan.
The President said that if they killed the hostages we must be able
to conduct a punitive operation which would blast the hell out of Iran.
7 On February 19, 1978, 58 Egyptian commandos failed to rescue 16 hostages taken
by 2 terrorists who had assassinated Youssef Sebai, chairman and editor of Egypt’s semi-
official daily newspaper, al-Ahram, and Sadat’s friend. The terrorists held the hostages
aboard a hijacked Cyprus Airways DC–8 at the Larnaca airport. Egyptian commandos
attacked the plane but were fired upon by Cypriot national guardsmen. The Egyptians
took shelter, then surrendered, and the hijackers gave themselves up. Fifteen Egyptians
died, and their plane went up in flames.
