26 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II 9. Action Memorandum From the Director of the Policy Planning Staff (Lake) to Secretary of State Vance1 Washington, February 4, 1977 Human Rights Issue for Decision Interest in human rights continues to grow. A PRM on human rights may result from an interagency meeting convened by the NSC, February 2.2 Brzezinski’s stress there on finding a “constructive way to infuse human rights into foreign policy” reflects a gathering belief that one of the main questions before the Carter Administration is, not whether we will help promote human rights, but how. This memorandum thus suggests both shortand longer-term measures for implementing the President’s commitment to internationally recognized human rights. Background/Analysis The Administration’s strong interest in human rights is clear. The President’s statements on this subject reflect the expressed will of the Congress, specific US endorsement of the UN Charter and Universal Declaration of Human Rights, and the belief that there is a connection between what we believe at home and what we do abroad. How to act on the President’s statements is, of course, less clear. Implementation depends on our designing an overall strategy—with a coherent set of goals, sense of priorities, and assessment of US leverage. The State Department now lacks such a strategy. Attempts to deal with pending problems are often uncoordinated. There is no focal point for considering future initiatives or establishing a general context that could reduce the need for tough decisions in other areas under crisis conditions. Several approaches (singly or in combination) could help: 1. Agenda for immediate consideration. Although we would caution against rushing into word or deed without more careful review of our overall objectives in human rights, there are some steps that could be taken quickly. Such measures could give immediate substance to state- 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P770038–0003. Confidential. Sent through Christopher. Drafted by Vogelgesang. Another copy is in the National Archives, RG 59, Policy and Planning Staff—Office of the Director, Records of Anthony Lake, 1977–1981, Lot 82D298, TL 2/1–15/77. Ortiz initialed the memorandum and wrote: “2–11.” 2 See Document 7.
