Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX cations. Finally, it could sharpen the Soviet fear of political evolution in East Europe and perhaps bring greater Soviet repression. 4. De-emphasize cooperation with both the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe. The rationale of this option could be that denying—or merely impeding—the flow of economic assistance and technology transfers sharpens the reform issues in the Soviet political system more quickly and critically than would increasing economic interaction. Thus, by reducing the role of Eastern Europe as a conduit of technology to the Soviet Union, the U.S. could increase the internal Soviet pressures for change. At the same time, this approach should reduce the Soviet capabilities and pursue a competitive foreign policy with military and economic means. Among the arguments against this approach, it may be insisted that U.S. policy cannot significantly restrain the diffusion of technology and economic interaction in the world, and, therefore, the Soviet Union will find other sources, notwithstanding U.S. reluctance to provide them. Such a competitive stance by the U.S. might also prompt a more aggressive Soviet use of its military power in winning the diplomatic and political leverage in non-European areas. Moscow might also pursue a less moderate role in European affairs by creating periodic crises and indulging in spoiling diplomatic tactics wherever possible. The security policy corollary to these four options Each of these options is based on different assumptions about the nature of change in the Soviet Bloc. Changes inevitably are accompanied by uncertainties, uncertainties which both Eastern and Western political leaders desire to reduce or eliminate. In other words, they want predictable change as long as it is also controllable for their own purposes. Military power provides one of the more important means for dealing with the political uncertainties and for controlling and limiting processes of political change. The policy options that promise more economic change in the
