1056  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
President Prado had to face, in addition to the other problems confront-
ing democracy in Latin America, the handicap of an economic reces-
sion. He observed that many of Peru’s requirements for U.S. aid were 
shared by most Latin American countries but that Peru’s needs were 
particularly urgent.
Mr. Rubottom said that the U.S. was sympathetically aware of the 
problems facing Peru and other Latin American nations and that we 
wished to cooperate closely with Latin America in striving to solve them. 
He said that the economic development needs of Latin America obvi-
ously could not be met merely from U.S. economic assistance resources, 
but he expressed confidence that substantial progress could be made 
through U.S.-Latin American cooperation. In reply to a remark by Dr. 
Hoyos concerning a reference in his Santa Barbara speech of October 
103 to the importance of private capital in economic development, Mr. 
Rubottom pointed out the role which foreign private capital had played 
in the development of the U.S. economy prior to World War I. He also 
spoke of the vital role which domestic private capital could play in the 
economic development of Latin America and of the importance of cre-
ating conditions which would induce capital to stay in the country.
After some further exchange on economic development and basic 
commodity problems, Dr. Porras again referred to his need to take 
some concrete offer back to Peru with him and asked whether he could 
be given a commitment for a specific sum of money as a credit to the 
Banco Minero.
Mr. Rubottom said that he could not give such a commitment and, 
furthermore, that he did not believe such a step would be in the best 
interests of either the U.S. or Peru. He referred to the press statement 
released by Embassy Lima on October 14 and to the sentence express-
ing the readiness of the U.S. to give careful and sympathetic consid-
eration to any applications made by the Peruvian Government for 
loans to finance sound and constructive projects, especially projects 
designed to alleviate distress in the mining areas. Mr. Rubottom said 
that the Department and other U.S. Agencies stood fully behind that 
statement and that he believes it constituted an important assurance to 
the Peruvian Government that any sound loan applications made by it 
would receive prompt and sympathetic attention in Washington.
Dr. Porras asked whether he could assure the Peruvian 
Government and public that the United States was prepared to 
give expeditious, careful and sympathetic attention to any Peruvian 
3 For the text of Assistant Secretary Rubottom’s speech, see the Department of State 
Bulletin, October 27, 1958, p. 654.
4 The statement under reference is quoted in telegram 196 from Lima, October l. 
(411.006/10–158)
