588
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
194.
Paper Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1
RP M 78–10144
Washington, April 5, 1978
SUBJECT
Ceausescu’s Romania: A Situation Report
1. As head of state and Secretary General of the ruling communist
party, President Ceausescu is very obviously the supreme national
leader of Romania today and we are not aware of any individual or
faction within the leadership that could challenge his position. The
personality cult that enshrines him is rivaled only by that of North
Korea’s Kim Il-song.2
2. Ceausescu keeps leading party and government functionaries
under control and off balance by means of a periodic rotation of top
personnel, which can affect even his closest associates. Although these
arbitrary shifts, as well as the elevation of his wife, Elena, to high party
posts, have caused resentment within the hierarchy, the grumbling is
likely to remain within bounds.
3. In contrast to its outward-looking and independent foreign poli-
cies, the regime maintains perhaps the most authoritarian domestic
controls among Warsaw Pact states. Bucharest’s tactics in dealing with
the small manifestation of dissidence that formed around author Paul
Goma last year was to isolate individual dissidents and allow them to
emigrate. The movement has since collapsed.3
4. Instances of workers’ unrest, including a slowdown in a major
coal mining region in August, represented a potentially more serious
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of Support Services (DI), Job
80T00634A, Production Case Files (1978), Box 2, Ceausescu’s Romania: A Situation Report.
Confidential. The paper was prepared in the National Foreign Assessment Center.
2 In preparation for the trip to Washington, the CIA also circulated a biographic
research paper in March, entitled “Nicolae Ceausescu: Romania’s Maverick Leader.” The
paper described him as possessing “shrewdness and flexibility in anticipating potential
political crises and circumventing them.” “However,” the paper continued, “a recent
psychiatric evaluation depicts him as possessing an unshakable belief in the wisdom of
his decisions, an intense attachment to his goals, and a conviction that he alone knows
what’s best for his country.” (National Archives, RG 59, Bureau of Intelligence and
Research, Office of Analysis for the Commonwealth and Eastern Europe, Office Subject
Files, 1958–1978, Lot 92D468, Box 5, Hungary Jan–June 1978)
3 The Office of Research and Political Analysis at the CIA disseminated a report
arguing that “resumption of wide-scale political dissident activity appears dim.” (Central
Intelligence Agency, Executive Registry, Job 80T00634A, Box 2, unlabeled folder)
