Cabinet officials, if we are to have safeguards of efficiency, economy, and
probity.
ARMY AND NAVY
Little has developed in relation to our national defense which needs special
attention. Progress is constantly being made in air navigation and requires
encouragement and development. Army aviators have made a successful
trip around the world, for which I recommend suitable recognition through
provisions for promotion, compensation, and retirement. Under the
direction of the Navy a new Zeppelin has been successfully brought from
Europe across the Atlantic to our own country.
Due to the efficient supervision of the Secretary of War the Army of the
United States has been organized with a small body of Regulars and a
moderate National Guard and Reserve. The defense test of September 12
demonstrated the efficiency of the operating plans. These methods and
operations are well worthy of congressional support.
Under the limitation of armaments treaty a large saving in outlay and a
considerable decrease in maintenance of the Navy has been accomplished.
We should maintain the policy of constantly working toward the full treaty
strength of the Navy. Careful investigation is being made in this department
of the relative importance of aircraft, surface and submarine vessels, in
order that we may not fail to take advantage of all modern improvements
for our national defense. A special commission also is investigating the
problem of petroleum oil for the Navy, considering the best policy to insure
the future supply of fuel oil and prevent the threatened drainage of naval oil
reserves. Legislative action is required to carry on experiments in oil shale
reduction, as large deposits of this type have been set aside for the use of
the Navy.
We have been constantly besought to engage in competitive armaments.
Frequent reports will reach us of the magnitude of the military equipment of
other nations. We shall do well to be little impressed by such reports or such
actions. Any nation undertaking to maintain a military establishment with
aggressive and imperialistic designs will find itself severely handicapped in
the economic development of the world. I believe thoroughly in the Army
