World Hunger and Food Policy
851
Key Issues
We believe that there are three key issues related to the proposal.
1. Title II—The donation program is the most purely humanitarian
element of PL 480 and the main source of U.S. response to natural dis-
asters. It has strong public support centered around the voluntary
agencies and is normally backed by large majorities in Congress. As a
result, a 1.6 million ton minimum annual volume for Title II is specified
in authorizing legislation (subject to appropriations override). If the
Administration does not propose a budget increase to maintain the
minimum, Congress may well provide it. All agencies agree on an in-
crease of $103 million to offset price increases.
2. Additional PL 480 Aid to Egypt—State proposes two increases for
Egypt: (a) a $60 million increase in the dollar amount of the program to
maintain it at the promised 1.5 million tons of wheat despite price infla-
tion; this would be funded by either a supplemental or reduction of
other country programs; and (b) $41 million for an additional 230,000
tons of wheat (about half of Prime Minister Khalil’s request last May),
raising the total to 1,730,000 tons or from 25% to over 31% of the world-
wide Title I concessional sales program. The issue is whether both of
these increases are essential to evidence U.S. reliability in the peace
process and to provide tangible reassurance to Sadat. The case for more
aid is not strong on economic grounds; Egypt’s balance of payments is
improving despite Arab sanctions, and it has a $550 million pipeline of
AID commodity import funds.
3. Title I Tonnage—For the remainder of the Title I program, all
agencies (State, IDCA, OMB, NSC and Owen) believe that the USDA
request can be substantially reduced. The question is how much to cut
back. The options are presented below. Our flexibility is limited by the
facts that deeper cuts could a) limit our ability to meet pressing needs
in Africa and Nicaragua not included in the original budget, b) unac-
ceptably reduce the unallocated reserve for contingencies, $142 million
at current prices, and c) create pressures for substantial reductions in
the large scale programs for Indonesia, Korea and Portugal which will
probably have enough foreign exchange to do without PL 480 next
year.
Reductions in the latter programs could create problems because
i) Indonesia believes that it has a firm $101 million PL 480 commitment
based on statements made by the Vice President last year, which have
been further defined by our Ambassador; ii) Korea receives PL 480 as a
quid pro quo for voluntary textile export restraints; and iii) Portugal sees
our aid as an earnest of U.S. support for its moderate democracy.
USDA believes, moreover, that cuts in Korea and Indonesia shipments
could endanger U.S. commercial exports for wheat and rice.
