March–August 1953 507 e. Special Political Operations: Current special political operations in Iran, which are directed toward counteracting and reducing Tudeh influence, would be continued and, if circumstances permit, intensified in the event of an attempted communist coup. These operations are designed to: (1) Influence specific political, military and religious leaders to speak out strongly against the Tudeh threat. (2) Induce certain political and military leaders to institute administrative and security actions to curb Tudeh activities (demonstrations, strikes, etc.). (3) Maintain anti-Tudeh propaganda. (4) Instigate physical attacks upon Tudeh facilities and demonstrations. (5) Obtain the publication of anti-Tudeh material in the press, and in pamphlets, books, posters, etc. (6) Influence the choice of a successor to Mosadeq in the event of his resignation or death. (7) Maintain liaison with potential resistance groups, in particular elements of certain strong tribal elements in southern Iran. (It should be noted that: (a) CIA’s detailed plan for covert operations in Iran during 1953 was approved by the PSB on January 8, 1953,6 and (b) certain of the special political operations listed under Condition II, below, could, if circumstances warranted, be implemented under Condition I.) Condition II 2. Measures to be taken to prevent all or a part of Iran or adjacent areas from falling under communist domination in the event of an actual communist seizure of power in one of more of the provinces of Iran or in Tehran: a. Military: In the event of a Tudeh coup in Iran, the JCS have recognized three feasible U.S. military courses of action, namely: (1) Furnish additional arms aid to appropriate Middle East countries so as to eventually enable them to possess the strength to secure their frontiers against effective communist infiltration. The Joint Chiefs of Staff keep this matter under continuous review. (2) Deploy appropriate Air Force units, on the order of 1½ wings plus support units, to southern Turkey with a mission of assisting Middle East governments in preventing the spread of communist power to their countries. The Chief of Staff, U.S. Air Force, has been re- 6 The official minutes of the January 8 meeting of the Psychological Strategy Board do not record a specific discussion on Iran; the minutes of the January 15 meeting discuss the adoption of D–22, cited in footnote 4 above.
