Ecuador  563
EC–25.	
Telegram from the Acting Secretary of State to the 
Embassy in Ecuador1
Washington, December 29, 1960, 7:25 p.m.
390. Following statement will be issued by Department of State 
with approval Foreign Minister Chiriboga to hold for release twelve 
o’clock noon Washington time December thirtieth.2 Embassy should 
communicate this joint statement to Government of Ecuador for con-
current release.
“The United States and the Government of Ecuador today made 
the following joint announcement:
Foreign Minister José R. Chiriboga of Ecuador has consulted 
during the past few days with high level officials of the Department 
of State and of various United States Government financial institu-
tions concerning President José María Velasco Ibarra’s economic and 
social development plans and the part that the United States can play 
in assisting Ecuador to realize these plans to raise the standard of living 
of its people. Various missions from the United States have already per-
formed preliminary surveys of the projects Ecuador hopes to accom-
plish in the fields of low-cost housing, electrification, road construction, 
provision of potable water to various Ecuadorean communities, and 
economic mapping of the country. On the basis of these studies and the 
discussions with Foreign Minister Chiriboga, U.S. officials are confi-
dent that prompt consideration can be given to the proposals for loans 
that Ecuador plans to submit in the near future.
The projects discussed that appear to be promising include the fol-
lowing: Assistance to Ecuador in establishing savings and loan institu-
tions that will permit low-cost housing to be made available to people 
of modest means, as well as assistance in initiating ‘self-help’ housing 
in Ecuador.
Construction of first class roads from Santo Domingo to Esmeraldas 
and from M. J. Calle to Huaquillas.
Municipal water systems which would contribute to the economic 
growth of Ecuador and the welfare of its citizens.
Electric power installations in the Manta-Bahia de Caraquez area, 
with accompanying transmission systems, and projects to increase 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 722/5-MSP/12–2960. Official Use Only. 
Drafted by Dreyfuss and signed by Lane.
2 It was issued as Department of State press release 713 of December 30 and printed 
in the Department of State Bulletin, January 16, 1961, p. 83.
