1980  875
• What steps can be taken to improve the efficiency of the Defense 
establishment?
• What will the inflation estimates be and what is the properly 
budgeted level for the real growth policy?
207.	 Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National 
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, July 24, 1980
SUBJECT
Nuclear Targeting Policy
Today you are meeting with Harold Brown, the Vice President, and 
me to respond to the request you made at Tab I, page 2,2 for a briefing 
on the proposed Presidential Directive on Nuclear Weapons Employ-
ment Policy. You asked to know:
—­what is changed in targeting, etc.;
—­how we propose to brief the allies;
—­what public statements are to be made? (TS)
Harold will answer these questions for you. (U)
With the new directive, you will make rather significant and 
important innovations in improving control and management of our 
nuclear forces. At the same time, it is not a totally new departure. The 
basic direction toward more flexibility was set by the Schlesinger effort 
in 1974 which led to NSDM–242.3 That directive, however, only ini-
tiated the process, and it was not very specific about the need for a 
better staffing capability. Nor did it tie theater forces and other mili-
tary operations into planning effectively. I have added the emphasis on 
exercises in the new PD as a result of your own involvement in IVORY 
ITEM exercises in 1978. They had an enormous educational impact and 
helped my staff and Harold’s design parts of the new PD. That learning 
process must continue if this new PD is to have its best effect and you 
are to guide the evolution of the policy. (TS)
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, General 
Odom File, Box 36, PD–1 through PD–63: 1/77–1/81. Top Secret; Sensitive. Sent for infor-
mation. Printed from an uninitialed copy.
2 Printed as Document 185. Carter met with Mondale and Brown from 1:30 to 2 p.m. 
in the Oval Office. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary)
3 See footnote 2, Document 29.
