Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 2. After Begin welcomed my visit and asked if I were tired as a result of my travels, I recalled that the President had remarked in connection with the Camp David meetings that making peace is harder than making war. I added that I had experienced some of the truth of this during my visit to Jordan and Saudi Arabia where some of the agonies of making crucial decisions related to peace were as evident as in Israel. Begin thanked me for recognizing the problems he faces, adding with evident feeling that some circles in the US always thought of ways to help out Sadat without realizing that others have problems as well in the aftermath of Camp David. “I have problems of my own,” Begin said which are internal in distinction to the external pressures on Sadat. “For the first time in thirty-five years, since January, 1944, there is division among my closest long-term associates in the Irgun.2 This has never happened before, but now, a group within the old Irgun, men with whom I have risked my life, have been writing a letter in which they denounce the CDA and the policies of the Begin government.” All I ask, Begin noted is that it is recognized in justice that others besides Sadat have problems. 3. I responded to Begin’s remarks by saying that, in some respects, I thought that the difficulties he faces are harder than those of others because he has to work them out within a democratic process. He agreed, stressing that half his old friends and comrades-in-arms in Herut3 either abstained or voted against the CDA in the Knesset. Sensing, I think, that his dilemmas were understood, Begin asked what I could tell him about King Hussein’s readiness to participate in the peace negotiations as a result of my recent talks with him. I told Begin that Hussein is not yet prepared to enter the process, giving some of the flavor of Hussein’s agony in facing what he had characterized as one of the most difficult choices in Jordan’s history. I said he faces divisions within his country, feels he has no Arab support and believes he was let down by Sadat. Before Hussein reaches a final position, I commented, he must go through the Arab summit process which is already in train. I added, however, that Hussein has confirmed to us that he is prepared to encourage his friends and supporters on the West Bank to cooperate with the efforts leading to negotiations and will put his weight behind the West Bank aspect of the CDA. Begin inquired whether Hussein 2 Irgun Zvai Leumi was a militant Jewish underground movement in Palestine, founded in 1937 by former Haganah (precursor to the Israeli Defense Forces) commanders. The Irgun is most remembered for its July 22, 1946, attack on the King David Hotel, the British headquarters in Palestine, killing 91 soldiers and civilians, and the April 9, 1948, raid on the Palestinian village of Deir Yassin. Menachem Begin headed the Irgun from 1943 until 1948. 3 Founded by Begin in 1948, Herut formed a constituent part of the Likud alliance of Israeli right-wing political parties from 1973 until 1988, when Likud transformed itself into a unitary party.
