Chapter 6, June–December 1990  947
182.	 Telegram From the Delegation to the Nuclear and Space Talks 
in Geneva to the Department of State1
Geneva, December 27, 1990, 1437Z
13920. Subject: START: Possible Problems with the Houston 
Package. Ref: NST Geneva 13894.2
1. This is Blackbird-No. 29. Secret—Entire Text.
2. In conversations today and yesterday, Nazarkin has revealed 
that there are some new problems concerning the Houston package 
that he did not mention in our meeting earlier in the week (Reftel).
3. Nazarkin told me that he has not yet received the formal Soviet 
reply to the Baker letter on the Houston package. However, he reports 
that he has spoken to Obukhov in Moscow and has been told that some 
issues are still under debate.
4. For example, while he told me last Monday3 that the Soviets 
might be prepared to accept ten percent for length in new types defi-
nition, he now tells me that they are likely to stick to five percent. As 
before, they are also likely to add ten percent change in throw weight 
as a criterion for a new type.
5. Nazarkin also reported that on the ALCM and heavy bomber 
part of the Houston package, the Soviet will propose some additional 
measures to assure that the B–1 could not covertly be equipped with 
ALCIs. I told him that this could cause serious problems for the Houston 
package as a whole and asked him to be more specific. Clearly worried 
by my response, Nazarkin begged off and said I should wait for the for-
mal response to the Baker letter. I told him that I hoped the Soviets had 
not walked back the B–1 agreement; if they had, the Houston package 
would come apart.
6. The Soviets also have some questions concerning PPCM. 
Nazarkin reported that the Soviets were “confused” by the PPCM 
section of the Baker letter and still seek clarification on some points, 
including on the number of facilities in the United States that would 
be subject to PPCM and whether this would include the Midgetman 
facilities.
7. Nazarkin also raised downloading: He said that he wanted to con-
firm that the sides had reached agreement on downloading in Houston, 
1 Source: Department of State, Bureau of Arms Control, Lot 02D360, Edward M. Ifft 
Files, Houston Ministerial Dec., 1990. Secret; Immediate; Nodis. Sent via the Blackbird 
channel. Drafted and approved by Burt. All brackets are in the original.
2 See Document 181.
3 December 24.
