board” bears out this conclusion. A perusal of Mr. Davis’ proposal shows that while reference is made to the announcement made in 1923 this reference was included merely to show that both countries had shown a desire to arbitrate the controversy. The Department’s proposal of June 4 is, therefore, simply an amplification of Mr. Davis’ proposal and suggested that the existing Mixed Commission should draw up a protocol of arbitration, which this Commission had not hitherto had the opportunity to do. 3. The suggestion that the Arbitral Tribunal should “take into consideration political, economic and commercial interests of both countries” cannot in the Department’s opinion be interpreted as barring from consideration arguments based on historical grounds. The Department has no reason to believe that Guatemala has so interpreted it. In any case this point could and should be made perfectly clear in drawing up the protocol of submission. 4. In making the suggestion mentioned the Department had no reason to believe that the consideration by the Arbitral Tribunal of the political, economic and commercial factors involved would in any way weaken the case of Honduras since the Department understands that that country has strongly established interests of this nature in the disputed territory. Moreover, the Department was confident that the submission of the question to arbitration on these bases would be equally fair to both countries and offer the best way to a practicable solution. 5. The Department is much concerned at the continued refusal by Honduras to submit this question to arbitration on the bases already accepted by Guatemala. Honduras has insistently claimed that Guatemala has from time to time penetrated the disputed territory and through gradual encroachment has established illegal control in a considerable section of that territory. If this claim is true it should be apparent to Honduras that leaving the situation in its present unsatisfactory state would open the way to further penetration by Guatemala in the disputed area. The proposed
