362 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II support we want in southern Africa (e.g. Tanzania, which has more political prisoners than South Korea). Our criticism of Uganda20 is not so enthusiastically endorsed by other African governments, but certainly does not hurt us with them; that criticism, moreover, has been somewhat muted because of the American citizens who remain there. Nor have other US interests been damaged in South Africa itself. The human rights policy does not seem to have reduced Pretoria’s cooperation on Rhodesia and Namibia, where it continues to act in consonance with what it sees as its national interests. The government’s sense of international isolation could, however, in time affect its nuclear weapons policies. Ethiopia’s closure of US facilities and expulsion of American personnel probably stemmed more from the new regime’s desire to seek a more ideologically compatible political and military relationship with Moscow than from unhappiness with our human rights advocacy.21 And Guinea—so far—continues to deny overflight and refueling rights to Soviet reconnaissance aircraft, despite our opposition to loans to it and our action on its PL 480 allocation. In much of Africa, like much of Latin America, promotion of human rights is our chief interest. Since a number of African leaders either have good human rights records (Gambia, Senegal, Liberia) or are working actively to improve them (Rwanda, the Sudan, Nigeria, Upper Volta), our human rights policy is more often supportive of local efforts there than in Latin America. East Asia The greatest risk to other US interests from the human rights policy may be in East Asia, and especially in Korea. It is possible that North Korea might miscalculate the degree of deterioration in US–ROK relations; or that US-Korean tensions (including over human rights) could make South Korea harder to deal with on a range of issues, including nuclear ones. Other potential victims of the human rights policy could be President Marcos’ cooperative stance toward re-negotiation of our base rights in the Philippines, and our close relations with Indonesian leaders. But both governments would balance their irritation with our human rights policies against their own interest in preserving the security and economic relationships. So far, they clearly are coming down in favor of the latter. 20 See footnote 7, Document 42. 21 See footnote 8, Document 42.
