Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977 We cannot defend a government that is based on a system of racial domination and remain true to ourselves. For our policy toward South Africa is reinforced by change in our own society. The activities of the NAACP are a testament to the inseparability of our foreign and domestic goals. It is also entirely fitting that Andy Young [U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations], who has done so much in the struggle against our divisions at home, should now be contributing so well to the design and effectiveness of our policies abroad. I have heard some suggest that we must support the white governments in southern Africa, come what may, since they are anti- Communist. In fact, the continued denial of racial justice in southern Africa encourages the possibilities for outside intervention. Similarly, when such crises as the recent invasion of Zaire arise,4 we see no advantage in unilateral responses and emphasizing their East-West implications. We prefer to work with African nations, and with our European allies, in positive efforts to resolve such disputes. As President Carter recently said, it is best to fight fire with water.5 The history of the past 15 years suggests that efforts by outside powers to dominate African nations will fail. Our challenge is to find ways of being supportive without becoming interventionist or intrusive. We see no benefit if we interject ourselves into regional disputes. We hope that they can be resolved through the diplomatic efforts of the parties themselves in an African setting. We are aware of the African concern that we have sometimes seemed more interested in the activities of other outside powers in Africa than in Africa itself. They know that some argue we should almost automatically respond in kind to the increase in Soviet arms and Cuban personnel in Africa. We cannot ignore this increase—and we oppose it. All sides should be aware that when outside powers pour substantial quantities of arms and military personnel into Africa, it greatly enhances the danger that disputes will be resolved militarily rather than through mediation by African states or by the OAU [Organization of African Unity]. 4 Reference is to the March 1977 invasion from Angola of the southern Zaire province of Shaba, formerly known as Katanga.
