National Security Policy 855 206. Memorandum of Conference with the President1 Washington, October 21, 1959 OTHERS PRESENT Dr. Glennan, Dr. Dryden, Mr. Horner, General Persons, Dr. Kistiakowsky, ­Secretary McElroy, Secretary Gates, Dr. York, General Twining, Mr. Staats, Mr. Hagerty, Mr. McCabe, General Goodpaster Dr. Glennan said the group had come in to discuss the transfer of ABMA to NASA. Underlying considerations were that there is not a clear military requirement for a super-­booster, whereas in the field of space activities there is a need to go ahead with the development, and the program should be based on a single super-­booster. At the present time there are two programs each of about $3/4 billion total. If these are put together the total cost would be between $3/4 billion and $1 billion, rather than a billion and a half. Mr. McElroy said this mat­ ter has been thoroughly discussed in Defense. The President asked whether Governor Brucker had been in these discussions. In this con­ nection he said he had no doubt that Brucker was ready to carry on loyally once a decision was made. Mr. McElroy said that the Army is now out of the space business, and is well resigned to an alternative use of ABMA. There were two options—to turn it over to NASA or to the Air Force. The JCS have looked at the problem and have con­ cluded that it would be better to retain the agency in the Department of Defense. The office of the Secretary of Defense, however, favors a transfer to NASA. The President asked how ABMA would handle the Pershing mis­ sile if this change were made. Mr. McElroy said that the Army can han­ dle the Pershing missile other than at ABMA. Mr. McElroy said there are two questions. First there was now a divided project for a super-­ booster, and this should be consolidated. Second, there is the ques­ tion whether ABMA should go to NASA or elsewhere. On these, he thought that the big booster responsibility should be shifted to NASA and that the ABMA group should be shifted to NASA to work on it. The President said he saw no sense in Defense having a super-­booster project. Defense should take advantage of the NASA work. In fact, he saw no problem in this except the possibility of a morale problem at ABMA. Mr. McElroy commented on one further point. Over the years he said the U.S. has given fluctuating support to science. He acknowl­ edged they had also given fluctuating support to defense. However, the 1 Source: Transfer of ABMA to NASA. No classification marking. 3 pp. Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, DDE Diaries. Drafted on October 23.
