March–August 1953
543
3. Former ranking officers of the army and the police
The station has [1 line not declassified] and who could be directed to
attempt to win the support of present army commanders for an opera-
tion against Mossadeq.
4. [1 line not declassified]
[1 paragraph (4 lines) not declassified]
5. [1 line not declassified]
[1 paragraph (7 lines) not declassified]
C. [1 line not declassified]
[5 paragraphs (24 lines) not declassified]
IV. Estimate of the possibility of overthrowing Mossadeq by a Shah–Zahedi
combination, supported by U.S. assets and policy
The act of overthrow would be either a coup d’e´tat or a rapid legal-
istic maneuver with Zahedi put into office by royal decree.
The attitude of two factors would determine the success of such an
attempt. These factors are: (1) the Tehran Army garrison, and (2) the
Tehran mobs.
Neither Zahedi nor any other military figure would be able to per-
suade the commanders of the Tehran garrison to follow his orders
rather than those of Mossadeq as delivered through the Chief of Staff.
However, should Zahedi be able to approach these commanders in the
name of the Shah he should at least be able to neutralize the opposition
of a large part of the garrison. Thus, a firm decision on the part of the
Shah is essential to success.
Tehran mobs are composed of a number of elements. On at least
two occasions in recent years they have overcome the resistance of the
police and military to take over the capital for a matter of hours. Such a
situation occurred in the “bread riots” of 1944 and on 21 July 1952. Up
until the present Mossadeq has been able to draw the greatest street
crowds, but this activity may have been more spontaneous than
planned and directed. In fact, information as to how pro-Mossadeq
crowds are summoned and directed is completely lacking. All available
assets in Iran engaged in the operation of overthrowing Mossadeq
should concentrate on the tasks of weakening the ability of Tudeh and
Mossadeq to call out mobs and of building up the size and leadership
of pro-Shah mobs.
Should the Shah–Zahedi combination be able to get the largest
mobs in the streets and should a sizeable portion of the Tehran garrison
refuse to carry out Mossadeq’s orders, the overthrow of Mossadeq
would be certain.
