1979 679 White: This would be in addition to, not a substitute for, expansion of M–X shelter numbers? Brown: Yes. Turner: My concern is, given these kinds of threats and necessary responses, is M–X in multiple shelters the right way to contend with possibilities readily open to the Soviets because of their high throw-­weight? Brzezinski: This is a real question because the Soviets are likely to have a strong incentive to cover the whole strategic target set as well as they can. Brown: But there are lots of strategic targets they have an incentive to cover. Our aim is to give them a problem that is too tough and expensive for the payoff. Keeny: We should not lock ourselves into a specific base-­line number of shelters like 4600 because this can too easily be demonstrated by the amateur critic to be inadequate. In any case, these calculations show that M–X is not survivable against the threats postulated. M–X exhausts the threat but does not survive. You’re left with SLBMs and bombers against each other, which is where you’d be without buying M–X. Brown: What do you think the Soviets would do with their 5,000– 10,000 ICBM weapons? Without a large hard-­target array to shoot [1 line not declassified] Part of the problem is whether the Soviets have a survivable ICBM capability while we do not. Kissinger has made the point of how intolerable this would be. M–X challenges the survivability of Soviet ICBMs. As to the apparent failure of M–X to survive in these calculations Bill presented, remember they are limiting cases in which the entire Soviet ICBM arsenal is thrown at M–X and MINUTEMAN. They would never throw [number not declassified] percent of their force at [number not declassified] percent of ours. They have many targets to cover and residual force needs. Keeny: But these kinds of calculations make it look like the rationale for M–X is to exhaust the enemy, not to survive. This is in part a political problem. Perry: If we actually deploy according to the defense conservative logic we display in these calculations, we would in fact have much higher survivability. And when the Soviets look at the problem in an offense conservative manner, then they will be deferred from attacking and probably dissuaded from attempting to overcome the shelter array with weapon numbers. Vance: These massive and pure attacks are highly unlikely. In a real attack, M–X would be more survivable than displayed on the charts.
