816 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI could download. Without these fallbacks, the Soviets would not be able to download any ICBMs in their anticipated post-START force structure. The delegation has been asked not to implement these instructions pending review in Washington. U.S. Objectives The U.S. interest in downloading ICBMs is to preserve the option to download MM III to one-RV and two-RV versions. Downloading MM III would allow Minuteman warheads to be spread over a much larger number of silos. Retaining as many silos as possible is desirable both because it would dilute an attack against the Minuteman force and preserve the maximum number of silos for eventual deployment of SICBM in silos. Without downloading, the U.S. ICBM force under START will either require a more costly deployment of single warhead missiles, or will not contribute as significantly to stability. There is no requirement to download SLBMs to meet START limits. The U.S. interest in downloading SLBMs is to establish a precedent that could be used in START II to achieve warhead reductions below 4900 by reducing the number of warheads on the Trident D–5 missile (e.g. from 8 to 6) rather than reducing the number of Trident submarines. Under a START II agreement that envisions a reduced number of SLBM RVs, downloading could increase the number of submarines in the force and hedge against certain improvements in Soviet ASW capability. A larger submarine force would also address the operational problem of keeping a constant number of submarines on station in a small submarine force. Finally, downloading would reduce or eliminate the need in START II to scrap Trident submarines before the end of their hull life. Soviet Position This spring the Soviets tabled a position which permits downloading of ICBMs and SLBMs subject to following provisions: — prenotification of the intent to download, — flight testing of the missile with the reduced RV number, and — destruction of the excess RVs. The elimination of RVs is currently under review in Washington, but is not part of the U.S. position in Geneva. In other respects, the Soviet approach is less restrictive than the instructions provided to the U.S. delegation. The Soviets have not indicated which missiles, if any, they want to download in START from the 1987 Washington Summit RV numbers (a downloaded SS–24 could have much improved hard target capability). The Soviets have, however, mentioned downloading as a means of implementing future RV reductions in START II. Highly MIRVed SS–18s, SS–24s, and SS–N–20s would be candidates for Soviet downloading in START II.
