International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues 1077 Mr. Pickering noted that, in the meeting this morning with the Secretary, Mr. Vance had explored ways in which the prestige and entree of Mr. Benedick could be enhanced, for example, through an ambassadorial appointment. Mr. Vance also raised the possibility of bringing in distinguished outsiders to head missions in this area. Scheuer reacted with the comment that it was not a question of increasing Benedick’s prestige, rather that an essential appointment was given to a person who may be very capable, but, to Scheuer’s knowledge, had never had ambassadorial rank and had no reputation outside the State Department on population matters. Such an appointment was a clear signal to others that the United States government’s emphasis on population issues had been lowered. Mrs. Benson pointed out the need for someone working full-time within the bureaucracy, if prominent outsiders were to be fully prepared to undertake a mission on population issues. Congressman Scheuer wondered whether a more prominent person with ambassadorial experience could be appointed to such a position. He gave as an example Ambassador Easum,4 now in Lagos, and emphasized that the key was direct access to the Secretary without going through several bureaucratic layers. Mr. Pickering agreed that prominent outsiders must be brought in, but added that it was very difficult to find such people willing to spend full time on these issues. This was the reason for an officer within the bureaucracy. He thought one prominent person for population missions would be Congressman Scheuer and asked for suggestions of other prominent figures. Scheuer responded that he would be available to undertake any mission at any time but that more was needed. Names of people could be obtained from the White House but he would make himself available for consultations whenever needed. The Congressman hopes to meet in the near future with the Secretary, Mrs. Benson, Mr. Pickering and Marshall Green. He was informed that the Secretary would be calling him that afternoon (December 4) to discuss this issue further. 4 Donald B. Easum, U.S. Ambassador to Nigeria, had previously served as Ambassador to Upper Volta and Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs.
