842  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
203.	 Memorandum of Discussion at the 420th NSC Meeting1
Washington, October 1, 1959
SUBJECT
Discussion at the 420th Meeting of the National Security Council, Thursday, 
­October 1, 1959
Present at the 420th NSC Meeting were the Secretary of State, pre­
siding; the Acting Secretary of Defense (Gates); and the Acting Director, 
Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization (Patterson). Also attending the 
meeting and participating in the Council actions below were Mr. Fred C. 
Scribner, Jr., for the Secretary or the Treasury; the Acting Director, Bureau 
of the Budget (Staats); the Attorney General (Item 1); and the Secretary 
of Commerce (Item 1). Also attending the meeting were the Chairman, 
Joint Chiefs of Staff; the Director of Central Intelligence; the Director, 
U.S. Information Agency; the Assistant to the President; the Special 
Assistants to the President for National Security Affairs and for Science 
and Technology; the White House Staff Secretary; from the Department 
of State—the Under Secretary of State (Dillon), Assistant Secretary 
Gerard C. Smith, Assistant Secretary G. Lewis Jones, and Messrs. Armin 
Meyer and Howard Furnas; from the Department of Defense Assistant 
Secretary E. Perkins McGuire and Assistant Secretary John N. Irwin II; 
the Executive Secretary, NSC; the Deputy Executive Secretary, NSC; and 
Mr. Charles Haskins, NSC.
There follows a summary of the discussion at the meeting and the 
main points taken.
1. BASIC NATIONAL SECURITY POLICY
(NSC 5906/1; NSC Action No. 2114–­c; Memos for NSC from 
Executive Secretary, same subject, dated September 21 and 29, 1959)
Mr. Gray said the first item on the agenda was a new mobiliza­
tion base paragraph for Basic National Security Policy. Some members 
of the Council might form the impression that the divergence of view 
reflected in the draft paragraph was a matter of semantics only; actu­
ally hidden behind the language differences were policy differences 
involving billions of dollars. He hoped the Council would discuss the 
issues which he would point out, and would not devote much time to 
redrafting the language of the paragraph.
Mr. Gray then began reading his Briefing Note (a copy of which is 
filed in the Minutes of the Meeting and another copy of which is attached 
1 Source: Agenda item 1: Basic National Security Policy. Top Secret; Eyes Only. 
Extracts—8 pp. Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, NSC Records.
