30, 2 p.m., repeated in my telegram just mentioned. However, I continue in the belief that this should only be done if the powers are in earnest in a protest and are prepared to follow it up to a logical conclusion. Any show of weakness at this time, either through acquiescence to the Canton taxes or in the wording of a protest they accept, will, in my opinion, be fatal to its success as well as contributory to the unfortunate result which must follow a failure to present [prevent] imposition of the new taxes at Canton. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6. I have today received a despatch from the American consul general at Canton, dated September 29th, from which I make the following pertinent quotations: “It is evident that the Cantonese authorities intend to levy these taxes regardless of protests from the powers concerned. It is also equally clear that once these taxes are applied they will be continued indefinitely,” and “when questioned as to what would be done about the tax after the strikers had been paid, Mr. Chen said that question had not yet been decided but the taxes would probably be continued indefinitely if the Government found it expedient and necessary to do so,” and “it would be a fatal mistake in the opinion of the writer (Jenkins) merely to protest against the institution of the taxes and then permit the Canton regime to proceed as though the powers took no further interest in the matter. The so-called Nationalist Government is now far stronger than it has ever been in the past and the powers must find some means either to prevent Government[’s] growing interference in our trade rights or to control and regularize its activities in the interests of all concerned.” I entirely concur in this sound presentation of the matter. 7. The Department’s instructions are solicited at the earliest moment practicable. 8. American group representative Peking requests Department to inform American group, New York, of full details of proposed taxation in regard to which he is commenting by telegraph. 9. Commercial attaché requests his Department be informed. 10. Repeated to Tokyo by mail.
