The writer of this despatch is strongly inclined to agree with the views of Colonel Bell and Mr. Brenan. It scarcely seems likely that the Powers will agree to do more than protest against the proposed taxes and if this should prove to be the case, the Cantonese authorities will disregard the protests and proceed as though nothing had happened. They have done this repeatedly during the past year or two and say quite frankly in private conversation that mere protests from the Powers will not influence them in any way whatever. The scheme hinted at with respect to the collection of the new taxes although quite indefinite as yet, appears to follow the general plan suggested by the Washington Conference, and there should be no objection apparently to the taxes as such, but merely to the fact that they are being put on by an unrecognized government and without the concurrence of the Powers concerned. It seems highly desirable, in view of the existing circumstances, to endeavor to arrive at some plan by which these proposed new taxes may be collected through the maritime customs and paid over to the Cantonese régime. At the same time, however, it is recognized that when this is done, the rights of the Powers generally to supervise the customs’ tariff and the administration of the maritime customs should be preserved as far as possible. It is not certain that the Cantonese régime would consent readily to the collection of the taxes through the customs, but if the Powers are firm, the writer of this despatch is inclined to believe some arrangement as outlined above could be effected. It would be a fatal mistake in the opinion of the writer merely to protest against the institution of the taxes and then permit the Canton régime to proceed as though the Powers took no further interest in the matter. The socalled Nationalist Government is now far stronger than it has ever been in the past and the Powers must find some means either to prevent its growing interference in our trade rights or to control and regularize its activities in the interests of all concerned. I have [etc.] DOUGLAS JENKINS
