1188 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement c. Provide for the conduct of research and development on improved measures for the protection of the population, including radiological defense, defense against chemical and biological warfare, mass communications, medical care, and survival requirements. d. Provide appropriate and adequate information to the public of the nature and extent of the dangers from nuclear attack on the United States now and in the future, and of the measures being taken or which could be taken to alleviate them. Internal Security 27. The Soviet Bloc should be confronted with internal security measures presenting such risks as will serve as a deterrent to covert attack against the United States. 28. The United States should, to the extent practicable, provide adequate deterrents (a) to clandestine introduction of nuclear weapons by any means such as submarines, small craft, merchant vessels, air­ craft, illegal entry of persons and things, and diplomatic channels; and (b) to utilization of such weapons against vital targets. Efforts should be continued to develop improved passive devices for the detection of fissionable material introduced by such means, and to assure their effective use. Efforts should be continued to develop a prototype of an active device.17 This policy and the programs to implement it will be kept under continuing review in accordance with existing arrange­ ments and in light of all applicable factors, including the growing shift to ICBM’s in Soviet strategic attack capabilities against U.S. retaliatory forces. 29. Measures should be taken to protect U.S. aircraft and airports as appropriate, against sabotage, espionage, and other subversive activi­ ties, and to provide appropriate safeguards relative to the operations within the continental United States of Soviet Bloc airlines. 30. Selected industrial and governmental facilities of a highly crit­ ical nature should, as appropriate, be protected against espionage and clandestine attack by nuclear, chemical, and biological weapons and conventional sabotage. 31. Selective counterintelligence coverage should be maintained of foreign diplomatic and official personnel suspected of engaging in activities beyond the scope of their normal diplomatic assignments. 32. Plans for the detention in the event of emergency of persons potentially dangerous to the United States should be maintained in a high state of readiness. 17 No decision as to production and use of such a device will be made by the Presi­ dent before completion and testing of a prototype. [Footnote is in the original.]
