1214
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
directed at Israel,” followed by abstention; 2) “leave the resolution as it
is,” then veto it; and 3) produce a new U.S. resolution “which focuses
on the main problems in South Lebanon and directs attention toward
possible ways of dealing with them.” Of these, Vance chose the third
option. A copy of the new draft U.S. resolution, the Lebanese draft, and
the action memorandum are in the Department of State, Office of the
Secretariat Staff, Special Handling Restrictions Memos, 1979–1983, Lot
96D262, Box 4, ES Sensitive April 1–30 1980.
However, the pace of events in the Security Council and the situa-
tion in Lebanon meant the U.S.-drafted resolution had little traction.
On April 20, Representative to the United Nations Donald F. McHenry
reported that if “an immediate improvement on the ground, plus some
long-term improvements in UNIFIL’s situation were possible,” the
Lebanese draft “might be avoided, but such developments are unlikely
in light of Haddad’s wish to enlarge his area of control, Israel’s support
of that objective, probable Lebanese inability to take the necessary
steps, and the time required to accomplish any long-term improve-
ments. Despite understanding among Western SC members and troop
contributors for Israel’s security concerns, they consider a strong reso-
lution, focused on Israel’s and Haddad’s misdeeds, justifiable in the
present situation.” McHenry concluded: “U.S. failure to join in support
of such a resolution will concern our Western allies and a U.S. veto, pre-
venting action, will meet with no understanding.” (Telegram 1541 from
the U.S. Mission to the United Nations, April 20; Carter Library, Na-
tional Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East, Subject File, Box 58,
Lebanon: 4/80) Proposed revisions to the U.S draft were discussed
with the Lebanese on April 22. (Telegram 1588 from the U.S. Mission to
the United Nations, April 23; National Archives, RG 59, Central For-
eign Policy File, D800201–0157) A Tunisian redrafted version of the res-
olution was presented April 23. (Telegram 1610 from the U.S. Mission
to the United Nations, April 24; National Archives, RG 59, Central For-
eign Policy File, D800202–0801) On the redraft, Assistant to the Presi-
dent for National Security Affairs Zbigniew Brzezinski related to Presi-
dent Jimmy Carter in a April 23 memorandum that “other members of
the Council” would not accept references to the Palestinian attack on
the Israeli Mishgav Am kibbutz (see footnote 2, Document 357) and
other “actions by the Palestinians,” “insisted” on “strongly deploring”
Israeli military intervention. The instructions proposed by the Depart-
ment of State, Brzezinski pointed out, were for McHenry to abstain
unless a clause including a condemnation of attacks on Israel were in-
cluded. Vice President Walter Mondale had advised dispatching a mes-
sage from Carter to Israeli Prime Minister Menachem Begin on moder-
ating the situation in Lebanon, though Brzezinski saw this as “partially
overtaken by events.” Brzezinski advised Carter to meet with Mondale,
Vance, and himself on the instructions to be issued to McHenry; Carter
