260 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX next three months, on the Golan Heights, in the vicinity of Beier Sheva and perhaps in the Jordan Valley. At the close of our meeting, while we were all standing preparatory to our leave-taking, I again reiterated to you my previous statement with regard to your proposed formulation, promising that I would think about it and convey my answer in writing the next day. This, too, is affirmed by Professor Barak’s minutes. And, indeed, on the following day, Sunday, September 17, 1978, I transmitted my written response through Professor Barak who brought it to your cabin. The text read: “Dear Mr. President, “I have the honour to inform you that during the agreed period for negotiations for the conclusion of the peace treaty,9 no new settlements will be established by the Government of Israel in Sinai, in the Gaza district and in the area of Judea and Samaria.” As shown by the record taken on the spot by Professor Barak, this was the only commitment I assumed at Camp David on behalf of the Government of Israel with reference to the settlement issue. Respectfully and sincerely, Menachem Begin End text. 4. When he had finished, Begin emphatically stressed that he could never have agreed to the U.S. formulation for two reasons. It would have meant an indefinite moratorium on new Israeli settlements on the West Bank and Gaza, and would give Arabs the right to veto Israeli settlement activities in those areas. He would never, never agree to such a thing. 5. Referring to the first phase of this controversy in the U.S. just after Camp David ended, Begin asserted that he had had a “horrible two days” with the media after the U.S. sentences had been given to the press. How did the journalists get those two sentences? Begin believed Doctor Brzezinski’s denial that anyone in the White House was responsible, but someone in the administration had done it. Saying that he was deeply hurt by this, Begin called the leak of the U.S. language unfair and destructive. The ink had not yet dried on the Camp David Agreements before a conflict had arisen between Israel and the United States, a conflict that was unnecessary. The letter to the President which he had just read to me was the complete truth and he would not agree to any other interpretation of what he had said at the September 16 night meeting. Begin then asked for my reaction to his letter. 9 Carter underlined “during the agreed period for negotiations for the conclusion of the peace treaty” and wrote “which peace treaty” in the right-hand margin.
