National Security Policy  1185
b. Emergency Federal relocation facilities should be equipped 
as required to permit immediate activation upon arrival of relocated 
personnel, and should be continuously staffed as determined by the 
President.
19. Protection and Dispersal of Federal Facilities.10
a. Except as otherwise determined by proper authority, new Federal 
facilities and major expansion of existing Federal facilities, important to 
national security, should not be located in target areas. The location of 
new or expanded military installations shall be within the sole discre­
tion of the Secretary of Defense [, except that he shall consult with the 
Director, OCDM, with respect to the location of new fixed retaliatory 
bases and of major administrative headquarters.]11
b. Fallout shelter should be incorporated in the construction of 
new Federal civilian buildings of suitable size. Fallout shelter should 
be incorporated in [all suitable]12 [selected]13 existing Federal buildings.
* * * * * * * *
ALTERNATIVE 1: MAJORITY
20. Civil Defense. An essential part of a balanced continental 
defense posture is an adequate program for the protection of the civil­
ian population from the effects of a nuclear attack, and measures to 
facilitate recovery and rehabilitation after such attack. [The protection 
of the population from fallout, together with the questionable prospects 
for effective active defense in the 1960’s against ICBM attack, makes 
development of an effective civil defense a matter of greatly increased 
urgency.]14 An effective civil defense is an important element which a 
possible aggressor would have to consider in calculating the response 
of the United States to any threat to our vital national interests, and as 
such, would contribute to over-­all deterrent strength.
21. The key element in an effective civil defense program is a com­
prehensive system of fallout shelters, since fallout is expected to be a 
primary hazard to the civilian population. Blast protection is a desir­
able added feature of shelters under certain conditions. Specific guid­
ance on this subject is contained in a separate NSC policy document.
10 A study on the passive defense of the population, particularly with regard to 
fallout shelters, is in preparation by OCDM, in collaboration with State and Defense, 
pursuant to NSC Action No. 2300–­e. [Footnote is in the original.]
11 Defense-­JCS propose deletion. [Brackets and footnote are in the original.]
12 Majority proposal. [Brackets and footnote are in the original.]
13 Treasury-­Budget proposal. [Brackets and footnote are in the original.]
14 JCS proposes deletion. [Brackets and footnote are in the original.]
