endeavor made next year to find ways and means of beginning payments on
the many years’ overdue interest in connection with these bonds.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
When, therefore, an editorial appeared in El Comercio, calling attention to
the fact that any budget which did not take into consideration the country’s
external indebtedness was not a budget based on sound principles, I thought
the moment opportune to discuss this entire question with the Minister of
Hacienda and for that purpose secured an interview with him.
I informed the Minister of Hacienda that it was not my purpose at this time
to protest to the Ecuadorian Government against the continued ignoring of
its obligations guaranteed by the customs receipts, but that my only purpose
was to discuss with him the effect such neglect of obligations on its part had
exercised on Ecuador’s credit and further informed him that my conference
with him on this subject was sought merely in order to enable me to
correctly inform my Government as to what were the intentions of the
Government of Ecuador towards satisfying the increasing clamor and
demand on the part of the bondholders for satisfaction; informing him at the
same time that I had had instructions from the Department of State to bring
this matter to the attention of the Ecuadorian Government, that I had,
however, exercised my discretion in withholding action on these
instructions, because I had understood that the budget bill would contain
provisions for meeting the guaranteed obligations of the Ecuadorian
Government in connection with these bonds, but that my attention had been
called by the editorial in El Comercio to the action of the Permanent
Legislative Commission, which had unquestionably acted in harmony with
the ideas of the Minister of Hacienda, in eliminating from the budget all
reference to these obligations, and I asked him for a frank expression of his
opinion as to how the situation was to be met, and what information might
be given the bondholders.
The Minister of Hacienda gave me what was presumably the same answer
he had given to Lord Hervey, that the Permanent Legislative Commission
had decided that the financial situation at the present time did not permit the
payment of any of these external obligations at this time but it was thought
some sort of provision could be made next year.
