1248
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Middle East” which outlined a viable formula for that transitional
arrangement.
—Under these circumstances, it would not be advisable for any
party to undermine the process through the imposition of any precon-
ditions or the taking of any actions that threaten the essence of the ne-
gotiations or purport to confront the other party with a new fait ac-
compli which might jeopardize the rights or positions of the parties.
Thus we were pleased when the head of the Israeli delegation, Dr. Josef
Burg, in response to a letter from Dr. Moustafa Khalil, stated on May 5
that you subscribe to the notion that no preconditions should be set for
the negotiations and that the autonomy talks should be guided by the
principles and provisions of the Camp David Framework.
—In this spirit, we did not give much weight to certain statements
issued by Israeli officials on matters which are related to the negotia-
tions. We took this as a way of taking a negotiating position in public
for obvious political reasons. However, a regrettable development took
place in the past few days when certain negative moves were initiated
that would result in poisoning the atmosphere of the negotiations and
make it very unlikely to reach agreement. I am referring specifically to
the move which is being considered by the Knesset to turn the annexa-
tion of East Jerusalem into basic law.5 You are quite aware of our posi-
tion on Jerusalem. While we are not calling for a division of the city or
the introduction of any barriers between its different sectors, we insist
on achieving that without resort to territorial annexation or violating
the rights and interests of 800 million Muslims. It is true that we are fa-
miliar with your view on this issue and we are not asking you to forfeit
your right to state your views in the course of the negotiations. But it is
a different matter to take certain actions through your political institu-
tions for the purpose of co-opting the outcome of the talks. These ac-
tions seem to be designed to render these issues, however crucial, not
negotiable or useless to discuss. Instead of stemming these attempts on
the basis that they adversely interfere with the peace process and create
a situation which is hard to keep under control, it appears that the Is-
raeli Government is encouraging or even endorsing such moves.
—Another case in point is your position on settlement issue. As
that matter was being brought up for discussion in the negotiating
chambers, an Israeli official revealed your plans to intensify settlement
activities and establish new settlements in the coming five years, i.e.,
for the duration of the transitional period. I trust that you agree with
me that such plans are incompatible with the spirit of negotiations. It is
an attempt to predetermine the outcome of the talks through taking ad-
5 See Document 371.
