“3. The encouragement of visits of its health officers to other countries and the welcoming in return, of the representatives of the health organizations of other nations.” Topic 3. Consideration of the results of the Conference on Eugenics and Homoculture which will meet at Habana in 1927, in compliance with a resolution of the Fifth International Conference of American States. As this Conference is not scheduled to meet until December, 1927, no instruction can be prepared. Topic 4. Consideration of the results of the Conference of Directing Heads of Public Health Services, which was held at Washington in September, 1926, in compliance with a resolution of the Fifth International Conference of American States. The First Conference of National Directors of Public Health of the American Republics met in the city of Washington in September, 1926. As a result of resolutions passed by this Conference, the Government of Peru has created a Permanent Commission for the Study and Eradication of Malaria; the Government of Ecuador’ is carrying out a rat flea survey in a number of Ecuadoran cities, and the reporting of communicable diseases received a new impetus. The Pan American Sanitary Bureau has expressed the hope that these reports will continue to improve. The Conference of National Directors of Public Health likewise approved, for the consideration of the Eighth Pan American Sanitary Conference, the series of propositions, resolutions, and recommendations which are printed in the document issued by the Pan American Union entitled “Conclusions of the First Pan American Conference of National Directors of Public Health”, enclosed herewith as Appendix No. 31.45 The Eighth Pan American Sanitary Conference was held at Lima, Peru, in October 1927 and was participated in by delegates from the United States of America, whose report (Appendix No. 32) is enclosed herewith45 together with the Final Act of the Eighth Pan American Sanitary Conference (Appendix No. 33).45 The results of the Conference will be
