December 17, 1978–March 26, 1979
695
—Encourage Egyptian TV & newspapers to have a more friendly
attitude toward Israel.
I hope you can help on these two things.
Sadat: According to the laws of every country.
The President: Yes, even without waiting for normal diplomatic re-
lations. Begin would respond immediately.
Unilateral commitments—
—no peaceful political activity forbidden;
—no restriction on free expression;
—no restriction on freedom of movement and travel abroad;
—amnesty—under existing British law—32 under current deten-
tion. Begin will have the law abolished (others have been tried—range
2,000–3,400);
—will expand program on family reunification;
—there is a limit on return to West Bank/Gaza
—planning to move military HQ out of populated areas. No more
military maneuvers in above areas.
I will give you a letter to that effect.
Last item: I don’t know if you can do this. I told Yadin I would ask
you to invite Yadin to visit Cairo museum, pyramids. A small personal
thing . . . maybe you can do it.
This is what I would like to say: that I reported to you; on all items
there was agreement, you accept; on other issues there are U.S. pro-
posals—and that you have agreed (oil/ambassadors-withdrawal); and
that Begin has agreed to put these proposals to his Cabinet. This will be
a U.S.-Egyptian agreement and the Israelis will have to accept or reject.
(Discussion of meaning of Article 6. The President makes the point
that you should interpret the language as your victory. The Israelis
always do that.)
The President: For the last 18 months I, the President of the most
powerful nation on earth, have acted the postman. I am not a proud
man—I have done the best I could—but I cannot go back to try to
change the language. (Above in response to Khalil’s request for word
change.)
Egyptians will send letter to Cy saying that “not consistent” = “not
contravene.”
Sadat: Will invite Yadin after the signing; will open the frontiers
after El Arish.
Hassan has asked for $22 [million] help in arms. Will need your
help. Bokassa also asked for arms. SR–71 will have facilities for Yemen
flights.
The President: Let Brown handle this—his military team.
