January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981 1147 President Sadat said he had no confidence in Mayor Shawaa anymore. Shawaa had sent many messages; but at the last moment the Gazans were intimidated by the PLO. And it would not be a short-time lapse: we must bring in Hussein. The President asked Mr. el-Baz whether Arafat would permit a quiet takeover of responsibilities by the Palestinians under Gaza-first. Mr. el-Baz said yes, some jurisdictions could be given to the Palestinians, but not as a long-term solution. For the transition period itself, the PLO would require it to be for the West Bank and Gaza. The President asked what if it were done one community at a time, on a selective basis. Perhaps Hebron would say yes, and Bethlehem would say no. Would this approach be supported? They could be responsible for maybe 15–20 things, like schools, roads, police. Mr. el-Baz said the mayors have no courage. The President asked about Arafat’s position. Mr. el-Baz said he thought the answer would be no. President Sadat said that Shawaa said in messages that Arafat had given the green light; then he denied it. We need to do this boldly, as Camp David and the peace treaty were done. Look at the problems of normalization and exchange of ambassadors. Now there is an Israeli flag flying in Cairo, and an Israeli Ambassador—who has not been boycotted. But he is unfit, doesn’t know Arabic or the Arab mentality. He is Polish. The Vice President asked if the Ambassador came from Poland. President Sadat joked that he was, along with Dr. Brzezinski and Begin. The President joked that he knows the trouble he has with all of them (laughter). President Sadat said the Pope, too! The President said he is asking about the Palestinians: will they accept responsibility? Will they accept anything? Mr. el-Baz said that, in general, if there were a genuine transfer of authority, it would be all right, on a de facto but not de jure basis. Let the mayors do it. They will give the green light, while still cursing it and the U.S. Secretary Vance asked whether the Palestinians would accept the SGA, or the mayors take the responsibility. Mr. el-Baz said that they would accept the SGA. The President asked whether they would prefer the SGA or the mayors. Mr. el-Baz said that they would prefer an SGA leading to an entity. Doing it through the mayors implies fractionating and no entity.
