Arms Control and Disarmament 1403 349. Memorandum of Conversation Between Eisenhower and John Foster Dulles1 Washington, August 12, 1958, 10 a.m. 1. We discussed the prospective meeting of the General Assem­ bly on the Near East and the President’s prospective participation. It was agreed that we would ask that the President should be the first speaker before credentials and like matters might be raised, and that if this could be arranged, the President would plan to speak at the open­ ing, i.e., 10:30, Wednesday morning. It was agreed that after talking with Lodge I would phone the President. He said he would probably come up late in the day possibly for dinner and spend the night at the Waldorf. With respect to the speech, it was felt that it was still about three pages too long. It was agreed that CD Jackson would attempt the revi­ sion and cutting while going to New York with me and that he would phone the revised text down to Mrs. Whitman. I pointed out the desir­ ability of getting a definitive text in time for translation, duplication and circulation. 2. I noted that Bob Murphy would probably come to New York and report to me there en route to Washington. 3. I spoke of the Quemoy-­Matsu situation and of the fact that it might be necessary to give a further warning to the Chicoms about this situation. I said that during the past four years the integration of these two islands into the Formosa-­Penghu complex had been such that I doubted whether there could be an amputation without fatal conse­ quences to Formosa itself. The President pointed out that this was not true from a military standpoint, and I indicated my agreement with that but did say that the connection from a political and psychologi­ cal standpoint had become such that I thought now it would be quite dangerous to sit by while the Chicoms took Quemoy and Matsu. I said that I had the feeling that the Communist bloc might now be pushing all around the perimeter to see whether our resolution was weakened by the Soviet possession of nuclear missiles, but I felt confident that if it appeared that we were standing firm, then they would not take action that would risk precipitating a large-­scale war. The President indicated that I might say something along these lines with reference to Quemoy and Matsu at a press conference. 1 Source: Need to resolve nuclear testing policy; Quemoy and Matsu; U.N. session on Near East. Top Secret; Personal and Private. 2 pp. Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, Meetings with the President.
