National Security Policy  29
Dr. York suggested that the Army Ballistic Missiles Agency is a highly 
competent organization, and is interested in satellites. The President 
quickly interjected a caution not to put the satellite job in any service.
Dr. Kistiakowsky went on to say that the Titan will be superior 
to the Atlas, but it is behind it by eighteen months to two years. The 
President stressed that what we must have is the earliest possible oper­
ational capability. Dr. Kistiakowsky went on to say that work is well 
under way on the Polaris missile. He thought it should be said, how­
ever, that we are not sure we can meet an operational date of 1963 for a 
1500-­mile missile—­we can meet an even earlier operational date for a 
1000-­mile missile, however.
Dr. Kistiakowsky said that a solid-­propellant ICBM cannot be 
expected until 1965–66. Thus there will be a gap of about five years 
between quantity availability of liquid propellant ICBMs and solid pro­
pellant. There is reason in his mind to set up a systematic production-­
improvement program for liquid missiles, for example going to storable 
fuels that are ignitable on contact. Titan and Thor have many opportu­
nities for substantial improvement. He suggested that we should ter­
minate the Atlas program after eighty missiles are produced. He added 
that Titan seems to offer the best booster for space missions.
The President stressed the importance of picking out the phases 
of activity in which we should undertake to compete with the Soviets, 
and to beat them. We should not try to excel in everything. He added 
that psychological as well as technical considerations are important—­at 
times appearances are as significant as the reality, if not more so.
The President asked if there is some area in the United States 
where we could conduct missiles tests in secrecy—­keeping undesired 
visitors out. He was told that Camp Cooke seems to meet many of these 
requirements. He said he would like to see it called the Defense Testing 
Station—­and see it kept out of service politics.
Dr. Kistiakowsky went on to give a technical net evaluation of our 
relative position respecting the Soviets. As to the ICBM, he thought 
they were probably about one year ahead of us in propulsion, one 
year behind us in warhead development, and somewhat behind us 
in guidance, but with a much simpler operational concept based on 
a mobile rail-­based system. He added that because of more powerful 
propulsion, they could have simply designed their weapon to carry 
the heavier, older-­style warhead. In the medium range missile of 
100–600 mile range, they are probably about three years ahead of us, 
having initiated troop training in 1953 and 1954. Their weapons are 
highly mobile, using track-­laying and road vehicles. In guidance they 
are probably behind us, with a one-­mile CEP for small weapons and 
a five-­mile CEP for large. Their IRBM is a 1000-­mile missile, which is 
probably a 600-­mile missile with a lighter warhead.
