Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI 312. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown and Secretary of State Vance to President Carter1 Washington, August 14, 1979 SUBJECT Assessment of U.S. Arms Transfer Policy We have recently assessed our experience of the past two years with the arms transfer restraint policy established by PD–13.2 On the whole, we believe the policy has supported U.S. interests in restraint without denying us the capability to meet our foreign policy requirements and the defense needs of our allies and friends. There has been considerable criticism of the policy from several quarters. Some allies and friends perceive the policy as being artificially restrictive to the point of denying legitimate access to U.S. military equipment. U.S. industries complain that it disadvantages them in international markets vis-a-vis other exporters. Most significantly, however, members of Congress continue to be skeptical of the policy. Some believe its only achievement has been creative bookkeeping; others feel that arms transfers are no longer being used as an effective instrument of foreign policy. We believe that all these criticisms have been overstated, but we nevertheless expect them to emerge once more as Congressional studies currently under way are completed and the Senate Foreign Relations Committee moves to hearings at the end of the year. Our own principal conclusions are: —The policy has required the creation of a planning system that allows us to look at the flow of U.S. arms transfers over a multi-year period and to establish priorities. —The machinery created to implement the policy ensures that the Executive Branch takes a wide range of factors—political, security, arms control, economic, and human rights—into account in all major arms transfer cases. —The policy has imposed measurable restraint on U.S. arms transfers. —Even though we have sold less than we could have, there has not been a subsequent reduction in the total volume of the world’s arms trade. (U) In the course of this policy reassessment, we have identified the following issues that will require attention in the near future. 1 Source: Library of Congress, Manuscript Division, Harold Brown Papers, Box 78, 1977 Arms Transfer/FMS Policy. Secret. Carter initialed the top of the memorandum. 2 See Document 271.
