ARTICLE VII Section 1. When a shipment of liquors is to be made to Canadian Territory under Article VII of the Convention, a full description of the packages, and contents thereof, will be furnished by Canadian authorities to United States customs authorities at Skagway, Alaska. A second copy thereof will be delivered to and retained by the master of the vessel having such liquors on board for transportation. Section 2. Said shipment, consisting of the packages as listed and described in the document furnished as required by Section 1, will be locked securely in a separate and safe compartment on the vessel transporting the same from the Canadian port to Skagway, Alaska, and the owners and master of the vessel, under penalties of the law of Canada and of the United States, will be responsible for the safe delivery of said liquors to Skagway, Alaska. Section 3. Before leaving Canada, said compartment will be placed under Canadian and United States customs seals, and remain under the two seals continuously until the vessel arrives at its destination at Skagway. Section 4. The shipment will be accompanied on the vessel by one or more guards representing Canadian authorities. Section 5. After arrival of the vessel at Skagway, Alaska, the seals on the compartment will be broken in the presence of an officer of the United States customs service, the Canadian customs officer at Skagway and the master of the vessel or his representative. The packages of liquor will be checked and will be removed from the vessel under supervision of United States and Canadian customs officers to a car of the White Pass and Yukon Railway. Such car will then be securely locked and placed under United States and Canadian customs seals. A Canadian guard or guards will accompany the car and shipment until it arrives in Canadian territory. Upon arrival at the point of exit from the United States the car will be examined by a United States customs officer and, if the seals are found intact, such officer shall certify to that effect upon the carrier’s manifest, allow the car to proceed into Canadian territory, and return to the Deputy Collector at Skagway the mail copy of the carrier’s manifest as a certificate of exportation. If the seals are not found intact, the customs officers of the two
