Chile  259
economic development purposes provided this can be utilized in a non-­
inflationary manner. This is where the U.S. agencies come in.
The U. S. team has had four three-­hour meetings with Figueroa, and at 
least one more meeting will take place. Besides the $50 million loan Chile 
will seek from the New York banks (in addition to the $25.3 ­million roll-­
over for the new stand-­by fund), Chile wants $50 ­million from us to cover 
the balance of an anticipated unfinanced budget deficit of $100 million. 
We believe that the Chileans have not been entirely realistic in assessing 
their financial prospects, particularly in respect of their balance of pay-
ments position and the inflationary impact the budget deficit would have 
even if it is financed by borrowing from abroad. We believe, however, 
that our analysis of the financial situation has been useful to the Chileans 
and may help to persuade them that a somewhat smaller amount of aid 
in 1959 will meet their immediate needs and ease the transition to 1960, 
when they propose to balance their budget without foreign aid.
Nevertheless, both IMF and U.S. representatives recognize the 
desirability of helping President Alessandri to cope with his delicate 
internal political situation. We realize that the extension of the aid they 
are seeking involves the calculated risk that it may not cure the infla-
tionary problem, but this appears to be less than the risk involved in 
doing nothing for Alessandri.
The U.S. team is awaiting additional data promised by Figueroa 
which should enable us to determine just how much assistance we 
might feasibly give and for which purposes. Between the regular and 
supplementary budgets, we might be able to pick up about $25–26 mil-
lion representing proposed imports of capital goods which could be 
eligible for Eximbank financing. It seems likely that Mr. Waugh’s high 
opinion of Figueroa will be translated into practical terms.
Summary of Possible Package3	
(in $ millions)
1. Stand-­by assistance	
 $ 53.8
2. Private bank loan	
    50.0
3. Eximbank project loans, about	
    26.04
Grand total, about	
$130.0
3 Negotiations on the financial assistance package were completed by May 23, 1959. 
When the Fund agreed to a renewal of its stand-­by arrangement with Chile on March 25, 
the balance available was increased by $2.5 million, to $8.1 million, in support of new policy 
measures adopted in order to terminate inflation in Chile. This program was also sup-
ported by loans of $28.9 million to be administered by the Export-Import Bank and $53 
million from U.S. commercial banks granted in May 1959. In addition, the U.S. Treasury 
increased the amount in its exchange agreement with Chile from $10 million to $15 mil-
lion. The Export-Import Bank also stated that it was preparing to complete studies involv-
ing prospective credits of about $25 million to private companies in Chile. International 
Monetary Fund, Annual Report of the Executive Directors for the Fiscal Year Ended April 30, 1959 
(Washington :1959), p. 21.
4 Chile seeking about $50.0 from U.S. [Footnote in the source text.]
