116
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
industry, it could transport part of the Iranian production to the USSR
and Communist China, but would require years to exploit it fully.
Effect on World Oil Supply
The withdrawal of the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company would almost
completely close down the Iranian oil industry, which currently ac-
counts for approximately 7% of the free world’s supply of crude oil and
5.3% of its refined products. Continental Western Europe secures 31%
of its refined products and 16% of its crude oil from Iran. About 25% of
the UK’s domestic needs are supplied by the AIOC. South Asia gets
close to 70% of its oil and oil products from Iran.
Within a year, expanded production in Iraq, Kuwait, and Saudi
Arabia could probably make up for any loss of Iranian crude supplies
without a special program of new drilling. Output in Saudi Arabia has
been continuously expanding; Kuwait, which first began producing
after World War II, already produces nearly as much as Saudi Arabia.
The amount of crude oil currently exported from Iraq is limited because
the government has insisted, for political reasons, on closing the pipe-
line from the Kirkuk oil field to the refinery at Haifa, Israel. By 1952,
with the opening of the new 30-inch pipeline to the Mediterranean via
Syria, present Iraqi export capacity will be almost doubled; by the fol-
lowing year it can reach two-thirds of the 1950 output.
The most serious repercussion, from a world supply angle, of the
closing down of Iran’s oil industry would be the loss of refined
products from Abadan—550,000 barrels (approximately 78,570 metric
tons) per day. This will cause a major dislocation in world oil supplies.
The expansion of refinery facilities in Western Europe, anticipated by
1953, however, will make that area largely self-sustaining except in fuel
and diesel oil.
The loss of Iranian oil will be most seriously felt in the area east of
Suez, particularly in India and Pakistan. With the exception of Haifa,
currently operating at about 25% of its 85,000 barrels (approximately
12,140 metric tons) per day capacity, the Near East refineries are at
present working at full capacity, with their products all committed.
Supplying South Asia by tankers from more distant refineries would
put a strain on the already short supply of available tonnage.
Internal Repercussions
The political and economic effects of the stoppage of oil produc-
tion, or even of a last-minute settlement with the Anglo-Iranian Oil
Company, will severely shake the structure of Iran. The Abadan re-
finery will have to close down completely in the near future because of
a lack of storage facilities. Crude oil production will also then cease.
About 80,000 Iranians will be unemployed and the government will
have lost the approximately 40% of its revenue formerly provided by
