836 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI — Whether to require reading tags before flight or static tests; if required, what procedures to use. (***) — Rights to read tags during inspections; number to be read during any inspection. 36. Treatment of missiles that are temporarily removed from their launchers, and of heavy bombers from which ALCMs are temporarily removed. 37. Inspection regime in the absence of limitations on the aggregate numbers of non-­deployed systems. 38. Ban on cruise missiles on waterborne vehicles other than ships or submarines. 39. Ban on converting airplanes into heavy bombers not equipped for long-­range nuclear ALCMs. 40. Submarine tunnels, including procedures for making these tunnels impassable to ballistic missile submarines. 41. Restrictions on production facility locations. 42. Silos used as launch control facilities. 43. What facilities are subject to the various forms of inspection under Article XI. 44. Procedures for dealing with delays during inspections. 45. Follow-­on negotiations. 46. Whether to treat silo-­based and rail-­mobile SS-24s as one missile type or two. 47. How long to have the baseline period run and how to regulate elimination during that period. 48. Whether to have an Attribution Annex or to record agreed attributed values in the MOU. Procedures for updating agreed attributed values, regardless of where they are located. 49. How to treat the Small ICBM (existing or future type). ( * * *) Issues Relating to Definitions 1. Whether to have a definition of re-­entry vehicle and, if so, what it should be. 2. Heavy bomber definition. 3. Reconciling differences on facility definitions (most reflect other differences in the Treaty). 4. Reconciling differences on the definitions of ballistic missile/ boost stage, driver training vehicles, ICBM for mobile launchers of ICBMs, launch weight, missile transfer device, missile transporter, portal, and self-­contained dispensing mechanism. NOTE: In addition, fifty-­six definitions are in dispute, but all are related to issues listed elsewhere.
