drought, heat and cold, earthquake and wind, lightning and tidal wave,
which are all too constant in their afflictions. The Government does not
undertake to reimburse its citizens for loss and damage incurred under such
circumstances. It is chargeable, however, with the rebuilding of public
works and the humanitarian duty of relieving its citizens from distress.
The people in the flooded area and their representatives have approached
this problem in the most generous and broad-minded way. They should be
met with a like spirit on the part of the National Government. This is all one
country. The public needs of each part must be provided for by the public at
large. No required relief should be refused. An adequate plan should be
adopted to prevent a recurrence of this disaster in order that the people may
restore to productivity and comfort their fields and their towns.
Legislation by this Congress should be confined to our principal and most
pressing problem, the lower Mississippi, considering tributaries only so far
as they materially affect the main flood problem. A definite Federal
program relating to our waterways was proposed when the last Congress
authorized a comprehensive survey of all the important streams of the
country in order to provide for their improvement, including flood control,
navigation, power, and irrigation. Other legislation should wait pending a
report on this survey. The recognized needs of the Mississippi should not be
made a vehicle for carrying other projects. All proposals for development
should stand on their own merits. Any other method would result in ill-
advised conclusions, great waste of money, and instead of promoting would
delay the orderly and certain utilization of our water resources.
Very recently several of the New England States have suffered somewhat
similarly from heavy rainfall and high water. No reliable estimate of
damage has yet been computed, but it is very large to private and public
property. The Red Cross is generously undertaking what is needed for
immediate relief, repair and reconstruction of houses, restocking of
domestic animals, and food, clothing, and shelter. A considerable sum of
money will be available through the regular channels in the Department of
Agriculture for reconstruction of highways. It may be necessary to grant
special aid for this purpose. Complete reports of what is required will
undoubtedly be available early in the session.
