North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
765
ships, and security interests.”) my task should be all the more aided by
the PRM–8 process.
Cons:
1. Most of the papers are very likely to be unifocal (economic),
short-term and biased in favor of no change. This is probable for three
reasons. First, most papers are coming through the EPG process.
Second, most are being written by parts of the bureaucracy which have
long-held positions to defend (e.g., the E Bureau of State). Third, most
of these parts of the bureaucracy fall into what I call the “false con-
creteness” school in their conception of the North-South issue. Most are
devout believers that the “South” does not exist as a serious diplomatic
unit; that whatever solidarity is present is rhetorical only; and that the
U.S. can and should “get the LDCs back to rational, bilateral relation-
ships with the U.S.”
These people may be right. But they are not likely to produce
helpful or intelligent papers on the crucial issues.
2. Because of the upcoming negotiations (UNCTAD, CIEC), the
short-term bias of the paper writers, and, to some extent, the wording of
the PRM, the focus of the exercise is very likely to be very short-term in
nature. If so, it will be very difficult to use the PRM–8 process to accom-
plish my task as I interpret it.
3. Since most papers are coming via the EPG route, I personally
have no involvement in the process until the papers reach the NSC
proper. And even if I did, the short-term deadline date (February 28),
the nature of the players, and the focus on upcoming negotiations all
inhibit my ability to use the PRM–8 process until a very late stage in the
game. [None of this should be viewed as a criticism of Bob Hormats,
who is one of my closest personal friends, who has been very helpful,
and who has always had my professional admiration. It is simply a
statement of an unavoidable bureaucratic dilemma.]3
4. Cons No. 1 and No. 2 listed above are not the products of my
thinking alone. They are reflected by many people with whom I have
talked in both State and Treasury. Even a very high-placed CFR Com-
mittee on Studies colleague of yours now at State with more than a
passing interest in North-South issues is concerned that the State
channels for PRM–8 are most likely to produce an unproductive set of
papers for the broader task you have assigned to me. And the worst ev-
idence concerning my fears surfaced today (February 10) when an As-
sistant Secretary who had just finished reading the E Bureau’s 57 page
draft of the most crucial issue—that relating to “political issues and the
3 Brackets in the original.
