1068 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III mission on World Hunger.2 In its preliminary report, the Commission presents only recommendations affecting the organization of the U.S. Government, levels of development assistance, alleviation of famine caused by war, and domestic feeding programs. The Commission’s preliminary recommendations are that: —The United States make the elimination of hunger the primary focus of its relationships with the developing countries, beginning with the decade of the 1980s. —The Director of the International Development Cooperation Agency be accorded Cabinet-level status, so that the objectives of equitable economic development can be more effectively integrated into U.S. national security policy and planning.3 —The United States move as rapidly as possible toward the United Nations’ goal of 0.74 percent of Gross National Product as this nation’s net disbursement of concessional economic assistance. The Commission further recommends that this increase be limited to development (not security or military) assistance, targeted selectively at poor nations strongly committed to meeting basic human needs and rights through self-reliant development, and that appropriations for this purpose be funded on a multi-year basis, and “untied” from domestic economic or political interests. In order to reach the target of 0.7 percent GNP as quickly as possible, the Administration must propose a substantial increase in its next fiscal year submission, with the intent of doubling5 economic development assistance within a few years. The Congress must be prepared to approve the request for increased funding. The Commission emphasizes that the increase must focus on the economic and technical aspects of development assistance and not on security assistance. —The United States Senate ratify the Additional Protocols to the 1949 Geneva Convention, adopted by the International Conference on Humanitarian Law in Armed Conflict.6 2 Linowitz submitted the Commission’s preliminary report to Carter under cover of a December 6 letter. (Ibid.) Substantial portions of the preliminary report are printed in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. II, Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs, Document 263. It was released to the public on December 10. (Seth S. King, “U.S. Panel Asks Dou-
