1068
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
mission on World Hunger.2 In its preliminary report, the Commission
presents only recommendations affecting the organization of the U.S.
Government, levels of development assistance, alleviation of famine
caused by war, and domestic feeding programs.
The Commission’s preliminary recommendations are that:
—The United States make the elimination of hunger the primary
focus of its relationships with the developing countries, beginning with
the decade of the 1980s.
—The Director of the International Development Cooperation
Agency be accorded Cabinet-level status, so that the objectives of equi-
table economic development can be more effectively integrated into
U.S. national security policy and planning.3
—The United States move as rapidly as possible toward the United
Nations’ goal of 0.74 percent of Gross National Product as this nation’s
net disbursement of concessional economic assistance. The Commis-
sion further recommends that this increase be limited to development
(not security or military) assistance, targeted selectively at poor nations
strongly committed to meeting basic human needs and rights through
self-reliant development, and that appropriations for this purpose be
funded on a multi-year basis, and “untied” from domestic economic or
political interests. In order to reach the target of 0.7 percent GNP as
quickly as possible, the Administration must propose a substantial in-
crease in its next fiscal year submission, with the intent of doubling5
economic development assistance within a few years. The Congress
must be prepared to approve the request for increased funding. The
Commission emphasizes that the increase must focus on the economic
and technical aspects of development assistance and not on security
assistance.
—The United States Senate ratify the Additional Protocols to the
1949 Geneva Convention, adopted by the International Conference on
Humanitarian Law in Armed Conflict.6
2 Linowitz submitted the Commission’s preliminary report to Carter under cover of
a December 6 letter. (Ibid.) Substantial portions of the preliminary report are printed in
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. II, Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs, Document
263. It was released to the public on December 10. (Seth S. King, “U.S. Panel Asks Dou-
bling of Aid to Food-Short Lands,” The New York Times, December 11, 1979, p. A11)
3 Mondale wrote “No” in the margin adjacent to this point.
4 Mondale underlined the number “0.7.”
5 Mondale underlined the word “doubling.”
6 Meeting in Geneva in June 1977, the Conference reached agreement on adding
two protocols to the 1949 Geneva Convention, one pertaining to foreign conflicts and the
other to domestic conflicts. (“Meeting on Revising Rules of War Ends in Geneva After
Four Years,” The New York Times, June 11, 1977, p. 5)
