728  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
GT–40.	
Telegram from the Ambassador in Guatemala (Muccio) to 
the Department of State1
Guatemala City, November 14, 1960, 7 p.m.
226. Pass Army and Air Force. Embassy Telegram 225.2 Prolongation 
revolt and failure so far successful government action quell it causes 
Embassy concern. Government vociferously castigating Fidel Castro as 
responsible this uprising and claiming invasion to back it up imminent. 
Yet (1) it has failed land troops at Barrios to retake base and Embassy is 
unaware any engagement, successful or otherwise, by Mariscal Zavala 
troops at Zacana, and (2) all indications are that dissident army elements 
jumped ahead on their own and extremist political elements are only now 
attempting to join forces. Capital remarkably tranquil and if movement 
were Communist-Castro inspired and instigated, it is logical to assume 
there would be coordinated agitation by leftist labor, student, etc., groups. 
Meanwhile, Foreign Minister today instructed GOG representatives 
Washington invoke protection Rio treaty, charging revolt Castro-­inspired 
and to be supported by troop and arms movements from Cuba.
This kind of situation of course ideal for exploitation by extrem-
ists both right and left. Embassy fears that with substantial propor-
tion troops out of city and general uncertainty and lack of confidence 
resulting from prolongation revolt. Communist and leftist opposition 
elements will soon try agitation of various kinds including strikes and 
demonstrations. In such a situation rightist elements might be impelled 
themselves strike first prevent leftist takeover.
Favorable financial news conveyed Ydígoras and Cabinet in 
Barall’s and my conversation with him this morning no doubt substan-
tially encouraged GOG.3 Ydígoras exudes confidence but recognizes he 
is atop murmuring volcano. Devoutly to be hoped he may be able trans-
form his confidence to air force and army elements who will proceed 
with vigor to end revolt. There are, however, indications of dissension 
within air force and that military are loath to fight brother military. Also 
air force and military, because of GOG’s cries of wolf over past months, 
now refuse to believe, in spite GOG protestations and exhortations, that 
rebels are really Castro agents.
If recent reports are borne out rebels in Barrios and Zacapa hand-
ing out arms wholesale to civilians and there should develop other 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 714.00/11–1460. Confidential; Priority.
2 See Document GT–35.
3 Barall informed Ydígoras that $10 million in budget support was forthcoming and 
that the Rio Hondo loan application was receiving positive action. Barall and Johnston 
visited Guatemala, November 13–17, in connection with the Guatemalan request for 
$10 million in budget support. (Memorandum from Mann to Dillon, November 17, 1960; 
ARA/OAP Files, Lot 63 D 146, “Interdepartmental Memoranda: Guatemala, 1960”)
