Afghanistan 563 a low-level threat. Their military position is really deplorable: poor equipment, no infrastructure, little effective communications. 2. As a confidence building measure, and also as a way of keeping tabs on the Pakistanis, we should have regular military consultations on possible Soviet-Afghani offensive options against Pakistan. 3. We need to find some formula for a Congressional reaffirmation of the 1959 Agreement, even if for the time being there is no legislative package for Pakistan. This is psychologically very much needed and the timing in Congress [will] probably never be better. 4. To keep India at bay, and especially to prevent the Indians from concentrating all their forces against Pakistan (which makes it impossible for the Pakistanis to build up their northwestern defenses effectively), we should explore with the Chinese the possibility of some Chinese deployments north of Nepal.2 This would siphon off Indian forces and keep the Indians honest (though anything along these lines would have to be done very cautiously so as not to precipitate increased Soviet/Indian military cooperation. 5. To mobilize Arab support for our position in the region, and particularly to shore up Islamic opposition against the Soviets, we simply must accelerate our efforts regarding the Palestinians. There is no doubt that this matter preoccupies the Saudis, and they are right in saying that lack of adequate progress on the Palestinian issue would benefit the Soviets quite directly. Either you or Fritz should find occasion to underline our commitment. 6. We should tell Sadat in no uncertain terms that his public polemics against the Saudis are harming U.S. interests in the region—and hence we expect him to desist out of deference to our concern with strengthening U.S. interests. 7. We should try to be somewhat more forthcoming on some of the military items urgently requested by Saudi Arabia—and John West will be writing to you on this matter shortly. Most involve symbolic issues, yet of considerable importance to Saudi pride and to their feeling that we are not reciprocating for their help with regard to oil production.3 8. If the positive news regarding Yemeni accommodation to Saudi demands proves (as is quite possible) to be false, we should actively cooperate with the Saudis in the implementation of the plan developed by Carlucci. Otherwise Yemen will be your next major crisis—and this time in an area directly of vital importance to us. 2 In the right margin, Carter wrote: “No.” 3 In the right margin, Carter wrote: “These are not known by me.”
