722 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV to increase the presence value of our Navy, such as increasing steaming hours and numbers of exercises. (S) Secretary Brown noted that the effect of increased POMCUS in Europe is to reduce the demand for convoys, and thus to reduce the requirement for ASW capabilities. He also remarked that if more ASW capability were required, he thought additional buys of P–3 aircraft might be a better idea than additional frigates. Stan Turner said that, provided we had enough AEGIS ships to escort our carriers, he was in favor of purchases of additional frigates. He remarked that the air defense problem will not be solved by AEGIS alone, but by a combination of measures—­land based air defense, greater ship numbers to increase the number of targets that the Soviets would have to attack, etc. Secretary Brown noted Stan Turner’s caveat that our carriers should be protected by AEGIS, and remarked that emphasizing numbers of ships at the expense of buying AEGIS ships, reflects a great underestimate of the Backfire threat. He noted Admiral Train’s remark that whether a submarine or an aircraft shoots at you, the threat comes through the air and you need something to stop it. Stan Turner noted that many submarines are not armed with cruise missiles. (S) Stan Turner went on to note that the building rates assumed for the 500 ship Navy Harold had presented were not realistic. In practice ship life times were considerably shorter than the 30 years Harold has assumed. Gen. Jones said that in terms of warfighting capabilities, 1 AEGIS ship was a much better idea than 3 frigates. He noted that we are fairly rich in frigates already, and that the Navy’s proposed mix of ship types looked about right to him. (S) Randy Jayne remarked that frigates provide some useful military capabilities. He also remarked on the complexity of the AEGIS air defense system, suggesting a slower initial rate of construction would be prudent. Harold Brown responded by saying that the AEGIS system had been very thoroughly tested, and that any implied comparison with the Tartar, Terrier, and Talos air defense systems was inappropriate. Finally, Russ Murray noted that the budget includes a proposal to begin the design of a newer, cheaper, smaller frigate, suggesting that this ship might be bought to get ship numbers up. (C) Harold Brown opened discussion of the question of whether we should proceed with construction of a pilot binary chemical weapons plant in 1981 by noting that there are two issues: what are the political implications of such an action, and what are the military needs for an improved CW capability particularly as a deterrent to Soviet use of chemical weapons? (C)
