National Security Policy  963
c. In the Soviet view, the emerging standoff of intercontinental 
striking forces marks a stalemate only of general war capabilities. They 
consider that this situation of mutual deterrence would open up new 
opportunities for advancing Communist power by political, economic, 
and perhaps even limited military means. We believe, however, that 
even then they would not wittingly assume serious risks of general 
war. We believe that they would draw back if the Western response 
were of such vigor that in their view more extensive Soviet involve­
ment would entail either serious risk of general war or net political loss. 
At the same time, we believe that the chance of their miscalculating 
risks may increase if they remain convinced that their relative power 
is growing.
d. Soviet foreign policy will remain devoted to the same objectives 
as heretofore. At least over a five-­year period, elements of both a policy 
of pressure and one of reducing tensions will probably be adopted at 
one time or another. The immediate outlook is that the Soviets will con­
tinue their present tactics of detente at least through the initial phase 
of the series of high-­level negotiations now in view. In another year 
or two they may feel that their capabilities in long range missiles have 
brought them into a period when the relations of military power are 
the most favorable from their point of view. They will still try to win 
Western concessions basically through negotiation. But the element of 
pressure and threat will probably become more pronounced, perhaps 
much more so, than it is at present.
e. On Berlin, we believe that, as long as the Soviets are confident 
that they can make progress towards their aims in Germany by negoti­
ation and propaganda, they will probably abstain from any major inter­
ference with Western access and from making a separate peace treaty 
with East Germany. If they decide that further progress is impossible 
by comparatively mild methods, they will probably make the separate 
peace treaty, though they would not necessarily try at the same time 
to obstruct Western access to Berlin. On disarmament, the Soviets may 
actually wish to see a freeze or even a cutback in some armaments in 
order to improve their potentialities for long-­run political and economic 
competition. However, the Soviets consider great military strength as an 
essential ingredient in the challenge they pose to the non-­Communist 
world. Moreover, the Soviet aversion to extensive foreign controls and 
inspection in the USSR persists, and will almost certainly exclude any­
thing more than limited agreements.
20. In the pursuit of their objectives the Soviets clearly consider that 
their military progress is a major direct factor in their growing power 
position. Moreover, Soviet achievements in the missile and space fields 
have already gone far to create an image of Soviet superiority in the 
eyes of much of the world. During the next decade Soviet space efforts
