Radio Free Europe, Radio Liberty, VOA
189
57.
Memorandum From Paul Henze of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, July 28, 1978
SUBJECT
RFE/RL and Budget Cuts
I gave you a brief report (in an evening report) last week on OMB
pressures which seem to be building up against RFE/RL.2 I now have
some documentation and the results of extensive discussion of this
problem with John Gronouski and Glenn Ferguson at lunch on 26 July.
As you would expect, they are very concerned. They regard OMB as
prejudiced against the radios and inclined to take only its own counsel
on policy considerations. The report of Glenn Ferguson’s meeting with
OMB officials on 21 July 1978, provided by the BIB (TAB A)3 lends
substance to these contentions; note the paragraphs marked in red on
page 2, where OMB advocates cutting out of minority languages and
the comments about bargaining off the radios to promote better
relations with the USSR.
The same day that Ferguson was meeting with OMB, Ralph Walter
was writing to me from Munich on the budget problem. His letter is
attached at TAB B4 with the most important passages marked in red.
He sees a budget-cutting exercise as completely out of harmony with
the positive thrust we have built up in the radios during the past 18
months and estimates that it will do serious, fundamental harm. He
maintains that cutting the radios’ budget is absurd, in light of the small
amount of money involved, at a time when we are trying to make
fundamental, long-term improvements in the radios and when the
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
Box 9, Board for International Broadcasting (RFE, RL, VOA): 1/78–4/79. Confidential.
Sent for action. Bartholomew and Inderfurth both initialed the memorandum indicating
they saw it. Brzezinski checked his approval of all 5 suggestions, subject to marginalia
comments noted below.
2 In a July 21 Evening Report to Brzezinski, Henze wrote that Ferguson was told
“OMB was recommending to President that broadcasts in non-minority languages be
severely curtailed, that RL as a whole be considered as potential trade-off to Soviets for
better behavior and that OMB expects tighter budgets for RFE/RL for future years!”
Henze commented: “Something is badly out of phase here—as I said to Ferguson; these
views go directly contrary to your views and to the net weight of almost all SCC and
Presidential decisions regarding Soviets in recent weeks.” (Carter Library, National
Security Affairs, Staff Material, Horn/Special, Box 6, Evening Reports File: 6–8/78)
3 Tab A is not attached.
4 Tab B is not attached.
