National Security Policy 701 155. Memorandum of Conference with the President1 Washington, May 4, 1959 OTHERS PRESENT Secretary Herter General Goodpaster The President said he had asked Secretary Herter to come over in order to talk about the set-­up for the OCB. Mr. Harr had been in earlier in the morning, expressing essentially a concern that the OCB should not run out of steam, and that the shifts of top State personnel should not contribute to such a process. The President said he had given some consideration as to whether it would be of value to have Gordon Gray chair the Board, but had thought that it would not, largely because Mr. Gray is already carrying a maximum load. There are two questions that need consideration, however. The first is the reversal of the rela­ tionship of the Chairman of the Board to the Coordinator of Mutual Security incident to Dillon’s becoming Under Secretary and Murphy as the Board Chairman, being the No. 3 man in the State Department. The second is that there be no loss of enthusiasm for the OCB opera­ tions, and that the Chairmanship not be over ­slaughed by the changed arrangements. The President thought that this should be taken up in the letter of appointment of the new Chairman. He also asked Mr. Herter to make sure that Mr. Dillon maintains in Mutual Security operations a responsive regard for OCB activity. Mr. Herter said that a lot of the difficulty is that the powers of the OCB are limited to recommendation alone. This is especially true in carrying out NSC policies. On the side of psychological activities, there is need for initiative and suggestions of a specific character. With regard to Mutual Security, his effort had been to keep the OCB away from the assertion of operating jurisdiction, especially on day to day and specific country decisions. The President added that we have had one idea from the start with the OCB, and that is that it should press and prod the responsible agen­ cies into action. The President said he did not think that Murphy would be guilty of any errors of decision or blundering in the OCB; he implied some question as to whether Murphy would use the machinery vigor­ ously enough, however. Mr. Herter thought that Mr. Murphy would be very valuable in the OCB because of the tremendous experience and detailed knowledge that he possesses over a very broad field of 1 Source: Department of State-­OCB relationship, nuclear test ban negotiations. ­Confidential. 2 pp. Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, DDE Diaries.
