752
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
ment.3 US food aid levels have been increased to more than six million
tons annually in recent years. This is 60% of the 10 million ton global
food aid target endorsed by the Conference. Recently, the United States
agreed to participate in the World Food Program’s 500,000 Emergency
Food Reserve and to increase its pledge to the WFP.4 US food aid pro-
grams also have been made more developmentally effective. To in-
crease world food security, the United States has formulated proposals
for an international grains reserve system. In the trade area, the U.S. is
actively pressing for broad based trade liberalization at the MTN nego-
tiations in Geneva. Its GSP system offers a wide range of new export
opportunities to developing countries.
Section II
The Current Situation
The world does not face a major problem of world hunger or star-
vation today; favorable weather and good harvests in most parts of the
world over the last several years have replaced the shortages and
hunger of 1973–74. Large grain stocks are building up in the US and
other major grain producers (including India). However, the world
food system remains a fragile one, where low stocks and only slight
drops in production can send grain prices sky rocketing, as was proven
in 1972–1973 when world grain production fell by only 2%. Thus, while
grains supplies are plentiful now, and prices relatively low and stable,
even a small drop in production, as could happen in an exceptional
year, could lead once again to problems of hunger and starvation par-
ticularly if stocks prove inadequate or are ineffectively controlled.
Problems of world hunger remain deeply enmeshed in the broader
issues of world poverty and income distribution. Rapidly growing
populations increase the need for expanding food production and dis-
tribution. An inadequate social and physical infra-structure prevents
the operation of an efficient and low cost food distribution system. Ag-
ricultural pricing policies in developed and developing countries alike
often discourage an expansion of food production and efficient world
trade in agriculture. In addition, a number of regional problems exist,
such as the fragile and deteriorating ecosystems in many countries (e.g.
the Sahelian countries which face an ever expanding desert) where
food deficits are most pronounced; or over population in other coun-
tries (e.g. the Andes) where land tenure systems and the climate limit
increases in agricultural production.
3 Established in 1977 as a specialized agency of the UN, the International Fund for
Agricultural Development financed development projects targeted at increasing food
production in developing countries.
4 See Document 235.
