318
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
67.
Address by President Carter to the Nation1
Washington, February 1, 1978
Panama Canal Treaties
Good evening.
Seventy-five years ago, our Nation signed a treaty which gave us
rights to build a canal across Panama, to take the historic step of joining
the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans.2 The results of the agreement have
been of great benefit to ourselves and to other nations throughout the
world who navigate the high seas.
The building of the canal was one of the greatest engineering feats
of history. Although massive in concept and construction, it’s relatively
simple in design and has been reliable and efficient in operation. We
Americans are justly and deeply proud of this great achievement.
The canal has also been a source of pride and benefit to the people
of Panama—but a cause of some continuing discontent. Because we
have controlled a 10-mile-wide strip of land across the heart of their
country and because they considered the original terms of the agree-
ment to be unfair, the people of Panama have been dissatisfied with the
treaty. It was drafted here in our country and was not signed by any
Panamanian. Our own Secretary of State who did sign the original
treaty said it was “vastly advantageous to the United States and . . . not
so advantageous to Panama.”3
In 1964, after consulting with former Presidents Truman and Ei-
senhower, President Johnson committed our Nation to work towards a
new treaty with the Republic of Panama. And last summer, after 14
years of negotiation under two Democratic Presidents and two Repub-
lican Presidents, we reached and signed an agreement that is fair and
beneficial to both countries.4 The United States Senate will soon be de-
bating whether these treaties should be ratified.
1 Source: Public Papers: Carter, 1978, Book, I, pp. 258–263. All brackets are in the orig-
inal. The President spoke at 9 p.m. from the Library at the White House. His remarks
were broadcast live on radio and television. In his diary entry for January 11, the Presi-
dent noted: “Senator Byrd suggested that instead of having a fireside chat on Panama
that I deliver the speech in the Senate chamber. George Washington did this a couple of
times, and Byrd said he’d be willing to have television cameras there to cover it as a news
event. First he wants to check with [Alan] Cranston, Baker, and the others, but it’s an in-
triguing and interesting proposition.” (White House Diary, p. 163)
2 See footnote 6, Document 33.
3 Reference is to John Hay.
4 See footnote 11, Document 56.
