158
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
but it is important to reduce their intellectual isolation from European
and American experience.
The Chancellor noted that the Deutschemark had been permitted to
appreciate in value by some 60–70% since 1970. Recently, the rate of ap-
preciation had been 1% per month. That had been the German contri-
bution to recovery. But this has been difficult on the steel and ship-
building sectors. The FRG will have a growth rate of 4.5% this year
along with 3.9% inflation and over 4% unemployment.
Dr. Brzezinski questioned whether FRG unemployment figures in-
cluded foreign workers who do not leave Germany, and the Chancellor
said they do. One million are unemployed. The German labor force in-
cludes 4 million foreigners, who stay in the FRG and collect welfare
when they are unemployed.
The Chancellor said that there had been a change in the structure of
demand. It is now satisfied. There will be no new housing construction,
only replacement, but demand for cars is high and demand for hol-
idays overseas is very high (60% of German workers vacation abroad).
He noted that 14% of disposable income is saved. Interest rates are very
low and there is more money to lend than demand for it. He had de-
cided to raise the VAT by only 1%, not 2%, and to offset that hike by
other measures. There will thus be a net tax relief. That has been hard
on Finance Minister Apel because of the resulting government deficit.
Since private investors will not invest, the government must. A 60 bil-
lion DM investment program is underway, despite unenthusiastic re-
sponse and red-tape delays in the states. The Chancellor wondered
what the FRG can do about its surplus on current account but allow the
Mark to float.
Secretary Blumenthal said that if growth could reach 4.5% and the
Mark were permitted to float, that would be enough.
The Chancellor said that was a difficult answer for Parliament to ac-
cept; they wanted more growth.
Specific Country Situations
The President asked for the Chancellor’s opinion of other nations’
economic situations.
The Chancellor responded:
—Britain: the “social contract” is breaking down; North Sea oil will
resolve British difficulties in 2–3 years, but that the interim will be
trying.
—France: is financially more solid than any other Western state,
but suffers from structural problems. The unemployment (5%) is very
sensitive politically; if the government can cut it by 100,000–200,000,
then it can win the elections; if unemployment rises, it is sure to lose.
