National Security Policy  859
5. It is agreed that NASA will provide support to the Department 
of Defense and military services at the transferred activity in the same 
manner as it now does at all other field centers.
6. The management and employment of the transferred activity 
will be the responsibility of NASA, and no commitment is possible 
with respect to levels of staffing or funding for the operation. NASA, 
however, will make every possible effort within its responsibilities and 
resources to utilize the capabilities of the Development Operations 
Division of ABMA.
7. The transfer of personnel, facilities, and equipment will be on a 
nonreimbursable basis.
8. The Department of the Army will provide and maintain on a 
reimbursable basis station-­wide services as required by NASA within 
the Redstone Arsenal complex.
9. NASA will provide for continuation, transfer, or phasing out 
of military projects under way at the transferred activity as may be 
requested and to the extent funded by the Department of Defense, and 
will undertake at the transferred activity such additional military proj­
ects as may be agreed upon by NASA and the Department of Defense.
10. The Department of Defense, the Department of the Army, and 
NASA, recognizing the value to the nation’s space program of main­
taining at a high level the present competence of ABMA, will cooperate 
to preserve the continuity of the technical and administrative leader­
ship of the group.
11. The detailed implementation of the actions proposed will be 
accomplished through the subsequent negotiation of cooperative 
agreements between the Department of Defense and NASA.
The Secretary of Defense and the Administrator of NASA have 
reached agreement and recommend approval of the above actions in 
the firm belief that the national space effort requires a strong civil­
ian agency and program and a strong military space effort by the 
Department of Defense, and clear lines of responsibility and authority 
if the U.S. is to employ its best efforts in the exploration of outer space 
and to assure the defense of the nation.
If the President approves the recommended actions set forth in 
A, B, and C above, the Secretary of Defense and the Administrator of 
NASA will proceed immediately to form the necessary staff teams to 
develop the required implementing documents.
T. Keith Glennan
Administrator, NASA
Thomas S. Gates
Acting Secretary of Defense
