program for the consideration by the Governments concerned of the question of extraterritoriality might be based. This Government for its part desires that this be done in order that it can have before it for consideration some feasible plan of action for the future. I venture to hope that the British Government will find itself so far in agreement with the attitude outlined above as to see its way to join this Government in urging the early calling of the Conference on Chinese Tariff and the sending of the Commission referred to above in order that the Powers may at an early date have before them data upon which they can determine their future course in dealing with these two of the many questions raised by the Chinese note. I have also received your note, Number 683, of July 7, 1925, with further reference to the situation in China in which you set down the text of a declaration which the British Government proposes should be made public jointly by the nine Powers signatory to the Washington Conference Treaties in regard to China. I note that the British Government is disposed to believe that the making of such a declaration at this time would assist materially in diminishing the dangers of the Chinese situation. I have given very careful consideration to this proposal of the British Government and feel with it that the situation now existing demands some action on the part of the Powers which participated in the Washington Conference, which will evidence to the Chinese their desire to see the agreements made at Washington carried out. I feel that some such action is necessary to meet the arguments that the contrary is the case which are now being used by agitators among the Chinese. My views as to the best way to meet this agitation have been fully set forth above. I repeat that it is the opinion of this Government that a strict adherence to the Washington Conference programs seems the only safe road. I have been unable to convince myself, however, that the present is an opportune moment for the making of any public statement with regard to conditions in China. I am the more disposed to feel that the Powers should wait in this matter in view of the fact that the representatives at Peking are even now considering the nature of the replies which they will make to the Chinese Government’s identic notes of June 24. I feel that the consideration of those replies should be expedited and that they should form the basis of a statement which the Powers concerned can then make publicly. As regards the text of the proposed statement quoted in your note under acknowledgment this Government would find itself in hearty agreement as regards the early convocation of the tariff conference. It joins the British Government in considering that such a conference will require to be of a more far reaching and comprehensive nature than was originally contemplated by the Treaty of February 6, 1922. This Government feels, however, that in any reply which is made to the Chinese Government’s note of June 24 and consequently in any statement that may be made to the public the Governments concerned should also indicate their willingness to
