International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues 1039 world population. About half of our bilateral population assistance now goes to Indonesia, Bangladesh, Pakistan, Thailand, and the Philippines. Moreover, during the past year, two additional populous countries, for the first time, received indirect U.S. assistance through private voluntary organizations. We do not believe, in priority cases like this, that the fact that they are “graduate countries” (with per capita income above the ceiling for AID assistance) should stand in the way of receiving at least indirect population assistance, where such help is needed and requested, particularly in light of the President’s commitment in his Environment Message (quoted above) to be responsive to all requests for assistance in this area. Over the next decade, AID looks to the steady growth of more effective family planning programs, sustained and more equitable economic and social development, and the deliberate introduction of a concern for reduced birth rates into developing country development programs. If adequately supported by the U.S., international, private, and other bilateral donors, a concerted effort can accelerate the reduction in developing country population growth rates and lead to an improvement of the quality of life for the world’s poor majority. 309. Letter From the Director of the Office of Management and Budget (McIntyre) and the President’s Special Assistant for Health Issues (Bourne) to Secretary of State Vance1 Washington, February 17, 1978 Dear Mr. Secretary: The President has approved the broad concept of an international health initiative as outlined in Peter Bourne’s memo of January 9th.2 The President’s State of the Union Message promises to “present a strategy this year for working directly with other nations and through international organizations to raise the standards of health and nutri- 1 Source: Carter Library, Staff Office Files, Special Assistant for Health Issues— Peter Bourne Files, White House Office File on International Health, Box 52, Chron 1–3/78. No classification marking. 2 See Document 306.
