International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
1039
world population. About half of our bilateral population assistance
now goes to Indonesia, Bangladesh, Pakistan, Thailand, and the Philip-
pines. Moreover, during the past year, two additional populous coun-
tries, for the first time, received indirect U.S. assistance through private
voluntary organizations. We do not believe, in priority cases like this,
that the fact that they are “graduate countries” (with per capita income
above the ceiling for AID assistance) should stand in the way of re-
ceiving at least indirect population assistance, where such help is
needed and requested, particularly in light of the President’s commit-
ment in his Environment Message (quoted above) to be responsive to
all requests for assistance in this area.
Over the next decade, AID looks to the steady growth of more ef-
fective family planning programs, sustained and more equitable eco-
nomic and social development, and the deliberate introduction of a
concern for reduced birth rates into developing country development
programs. If adequately supported by the U.S., international, private,
and other bilateral donors, a concerted effort can accelerate the reduc-
tion in developing country population growth rates and lead to an im-
provement of the quality of life for the world’s poor majority.
309.
Letter From the Director of the Office of Management and
Budget (McIntyre) and the President’s Special Assistant for
Health Issues (Bourne) to Secretary of State Vance1
Washington, February 17, 1978
Dear Mr. Secretary:
The President has approved the broad concept of an international
health initiative as outlined in Peter Bourne’s memo of January 9th.2
The President’s State of the Union Message promises to “present a
strategy this year for working directly with other nations and through
international organizations to raise the standards of health and nutri-
1 Source: Carter Library, Staff Office Files, Special Assistant for Health Issues—
Peter Bourne Files, White House Office File on International Health, Box 52, Chron
1–3/78. No classification marking.
2 See Document 306.
