444
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
5. Refugee Assistance. We must examine the question of how assist-
ance to the Afghan refugees in Pakistan can meet the humanitarian
need as well as serve other objectives. Multilateral assistance provided
outside the UNHCR context (perhaps through Islamic organizations)
could allow us to further the resistance effort more effectively.10
6. Approaching our Allies. We must plan for the desire of our
European allies to set the Afghanistan issue aside as soon as possible
so as not to do permanent damage to European detente. Our strategy
should focus on seeking their assistance in the Persian Gulf region
while deferring further direct European-Soviet initiatives (e.g. Schmidt
mission to Turkey; French approach to the Iraqis).11
II. U.S.-Soviet Relations in the Wider Global Context
—Soviet actions in Afghanistan, regardless of their motives, have
changed the strategic situation in the region; and we must take steps
which will restore a balance. The steps outlined under Regional Security
began to address this balance.
—This development requires two classes of response on our part.
• First, the actions which you have already taken vis-a-vis the
Soviets in the economic and other areas have clearly demonstrated to
the Soviets that their behavior will not be cost-free. I think the Soviets
were surprised by your actions. Thus, further bilateral steps are not
necessary; however, we must follow through with full implementation
of the steps which have already been taken.12
• Second, to counter growing Soviet aggressiveness, a long-term
commitment is required. There are no easy solutions to an increased
willingness on the part of the Soviets to use the military power which
they have built over the past decade at great domestic cost. U.S. strategic
modernization, increased defense spending, improvements in NATO,
and the RDF are all steps which will in time work to deter the Soviets,
if pursued diligently.
—Because the Soviets underestimated the U.S. response as well as
that of the international community, especially the third world, to their
invasion, we should expect that as soon as possible—within several
months—the Soviets will embark on a peace offensive designed to
separate us from our allies and to improve the Soviet image in the
10 In an apparent reversal of decision from the previous day (see Document 151),
Carter wrote: “Paks prefer UNHCR” in the left margin.
11 In the left margin, Carter wrote: “I agree.”
12 Carter underlined “must follow through,” and in the left margin wrote: “I agree.”
