806 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement the Attorney General to use the resources of the Federal Bureau of ­Prisons and the Immigration and Naturalization Service to find out just what aliens are in Federal and State penitentiaries, what their offenses are, and the length of their terms. This is being done in a very discreet way under an injunction of complete secrecy. There will be no consulta­ tion with the prisoners, at least at this stage. We are aware of the fact that if the Communists got the names of Chinese aliens in prisons it would be quite a windfall to them which they could exploit actively. Undoubt­ edly they are making great efforts to come up with the names of some Chinese aliens in prison in this country. Unless we are able to establish in advance that all could be paroled for deportation, it would probably be better not to stir the waters on this at all. We have made no decision beyond the very limited one to have this list compiled. We will decide what if anything we do with the information after we have studied it. If you have any thoughts on this, we would welcome them. We can not be sure from your messages just how effective Wang’s complaints on this subject have been. Enclosure No. 2 is a contingency statement we have drafted for possible use in the event of a breakdown of the talks if we decide not to do anything about Chinese imprisoned in this country, and if the Chinese ­Communists try to make a major propaganda point about it. Bear in mind that it is not yet certain we would take this public position in any event. It is all tentative. Again we would like your reac­ tion to it. I consider the thesis somewhat vulnerable in some respects, in view of our unqualified position on American prisoners, and our con­ tention that nothing in the oral give and take of the discussions affects the literal wording of the Agreed Announcement. This statement was drafted before the ­Secretary’s return, and our thinking on this subject has changed somewhat since it was drafted. 3. We wired you yesterday about the formation of a Subcommittee of the House Foreign Affairs Committee to investigate the mistreat­ ment of American civilians in Communist China. We gather that this was done on fairly short notice and without any very definite ideas as to what the scope of the investigation would be, or how it would be conducted. So far the Subcommittee has only asked us for the names of all American civilians imprisoned at any time by the ­Chinese ­Communists, and their present addresses. Apparently the thought is to invite (not subpoena) a number of them to come to Washington to testify before the Committee. We do not know whether public or closed hearings are contemplated. We would guess that the former is more likely. It would seem that there is no thought of censuring the Department in connection with this investigation. The attitude is one of cooperation. However we would be concerned if the investigation should adversely affect the Geneva talks or the prospects of the impris­ oned Americans. If we should give them the Lindbeck study (which is now undergoing a final revision), they might well publish it at any
