180  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
Eleventh. The American people lack appreciation of the extent of 
the crisis facing the United States.
2. I wish to draw attention to some of the new guidance and new 
emphasis in the revision before you, which reflects the impart of these 
factors. Please turn to Page 2, the “Outline of U.S. National Strategy,” 
where we restate the basic threat (Par. 3), the basic problem (Par. 4), and 
the nature of U.S. policies to meet them. (Pars. 5 and 6).
(READ)
3. Perhaps the principal new emphasis in this Planning Board revi­
sion may be characterized as follows:
a. The U.S. is facing an enduring crisis greater than heretofore 
recognized, which calls for mobilization of more human and material 
resources and for better appreciation by the American people of the 
extent of the crisis. (Pars. 3, 46).
b. If general nuclear war can be deterred, this crisis will involve a 
long, drawn-­out contest for world leadership with the Sino-­Soviet Bloc. 
(Par. 4).
c. During this time of relative nuclear parity, while the U.S. must 
securely maintain its deterrent power, military aggression will more 
likely be of a limited nature. Such limited conflicts should be dealt with 
in ways which will minimize their spreading into general nuclear war.
d. Concurrently, the U.S. must take a more positive initiative by 
increasing its efforts (1) in peaceful political and economic competition 
with the Sino-Soviet Bloc for the uncommitted and less-­developed areas 
of the world (Par. 5, 6–­a), and (2) in influencing acceptable changes in 
the Soviet Bloc through expanded exchanges and contacts, liberalized 
multilateral trade controls, etc. (Par. 35–37).
Part II
1. How I draw attention to two significant paragraphs in the new 
statement, which repeat and ­continue in effect the texts of last year’s 
statement: Par. 14 dealing with limited military aggression, and Par. 41, 
dealing with Communist China.
2. There was some sentiment in the Planning Board that both 
paragraphs required amendment. However, the Planning Board did 
not formally recommend their revision;—­in part because there is in 
existence high-­level consideration of limited war strategy and in 
part because both paragraphs affect most sensitive relations with our 
allies. Instead, it was left that I, as Chairman, would report orally upon 
the views shared by some of us on the Planning Board.
3. a. First, as to Par. 14, p. 5, dealing with limited war. For discus­
sion purposes, I have drafted an alternative Par. 14 on the single blue 
sheet before you. This alternative is based upon the estimate that, in a 
period of relative nuclear parity and growing unwillingness on the part 
of both sides to start general war, the USSR may be more bold—­not 
only in political and economic fields—­but also in probing (perhaps by 
proxy) through means of limited military aggression. (NIE Par. 18, p. 4).
