Chapter 2, January–June 1989  85
guidance for nuclear weapon employment, even with continued force 
modernization. Deeper reductions would require reconsideration of 
that guidance, and could affect allied perceptions of the credibility 
of the U.S. extended nuclear deterrent. Due to the larger number and 
greater hardness of targets in the Soviet Union, the Soviets may be more 
able than the U.S. to accept deeper cuts.
(S) As to the cost or savings of deep START reductions, it is not 
clear whether significant sums would be saved, as is sometimes 
assumed. Our experience with INF shows that we should not expect 
near-­term savings. Over the longer term, savings are problematic and 
would depend upon several factors. For instance, the U.S. must con-
tinue to modernize and retain its remaining strategic nuclear forces at 
a high level of operational effectiveness, and the costs of monitoring 
must be considered.
Weapon-­to-Target Ratios
(S) A second difficult question is whether the numerical limits and 
sublimits we have proposed adequately contribute to stability given 
their likely impact on Soviet weapon-­to-­target ratios. START would 
constrain the Soviet advantage in the overall weapon-­to-­target ratio, 
given the anticipated numbers of weapons and the pronounced target 
base asymmetry. Critics of START have tended to focus, however, on a 
specific weapon-­to-­target ratio of Soviet prompt, hard-­target-­kill weap-
ons to U.S. ICBM silos. There is broad agreement that this is not a mean-
ingful measure either of ICBM vulnerability or crisis stability. The ratio 
omits consideration of strategic defenses and ICBM mobility. These 
latter factors can enhance ICBM survivability and crisis stability, and—­
while not lowering the ratio of hard-­target-­kill weapons to U.S. ICBM 
silos—­can make that ratio less relevant. That ratio also fails to reflect 
the role that other elements of our strategic forces play in deterrence.
(S) We have not identified a program-­specific, post-START force, 
although we have constructed a number of theoretical possibilities for 
the purpose of assessing the military sufficiency of START proposals as 
they evolved. As currently envisioned, START would result in at least 
a fifty percent reduction in Soviet heavy ICBM weapons. Even with 
this reduction, however, U.S. ICBM silos will remain vulnerable. The 
Soviets are deploying a new variant of the SS-18 heavy ICBM and will 
deploy hard-­target-­capable SLBMs by the late 1990s. There are some 
options under consideration which could help U.S. ICBM survivability 
temporarily, but in the long run U.S. ICBM silos will not be survivable 
absent defenses. Enhancing crisis stability also depends on our decision 
regarding mobile ICBMs.
