1136 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement could get accurate navigational fixes regardless of the weather. Secretary Gates observed that the TRANSIT system had been extremely success­ ful and that its cost had been relatively low. The President asked how long a TRANSIT satellite would stay up. Mr. Rubel said that we did not plan to make the system operational until the reliability problem had been solved. When that problem had been solved, it should be pos­ sible to keep such satellites in operation for from three to five years. The President said he had no argument with what was being done. However, if one wanted complete assurance of the destruction of a tar­ get, one might expend 20,000 rounds of ammunition, but if on the other hand, all one wanted was reasonable assurance of such destruction, 1000 rounds might be sufficient. He indicated that he felt we could go too far in striving for perfection. Mr. Stans referred to recent press reports on an Air Force program for a “space plane”. He had two questions: (a) the relationship of this program to other programs, especially DYNASOAR; and (b) why this was a Department of Defense activity rather than a NASA activity. Mr. Rubel observed that this was one of a series of unauthorized disclo­ sures to the press. The space plane proposal was neither a project nor a program. Last year industry and the Air Force had become interested in the possibility of developing a capability for a special kind of flight. This involved take off from the ground in a conventional manner, then an intake of air into the craft, the liquefication of this air, and the sep­ aration of the oxygen from the nitrogen, and the burning of the oxy­ gen with hydrogen. Convair had prepared a “secret” brochure and had attempted to secure funds for further research. Last year and this year the Air Force had supported some related studies. The Air Force had asked for $20 million for FY 1962 for this effort. The Air Force had not yet explained what it wished to do with this money. Mr. Rubel again emphasized that no program had been approved. Mr. McCone inquired as to the prospects of success of SAINT. In response Mr. Rubel said he had no doubt we could develop satellite intercept capability within a time period of three to four years. His only doubt was whether we could do it for the $61 million which was pro­ jected. Mr. McCone suggested that if we could do this, it raised a ques­ tion of the effectiveness of SAMOS and MIDAS for we had to assume that the USSR could develop a similar capability. Mr. Rubel stated that we did not know enough about the economics of such operations to know whether the development of such a capability by the USSR would be much of a problem in relationship to SAMOS. If a SAMOS satellite were put up over the USSR and if its orbit shifted by 1000 miles on every pass, we did not know how difficult it would be for the Soviets to knock it down. The President asked whether the Russians would not be able to predict its orbit. Mr. Rubel acknowledged that they would be able to predict its orbit on the basis of one or two passes. This was
