Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX basis, although improved Romanian emigration performance might make this possible in the future. Points to be Made: (President should raise) —Assure Ceausescu that the Administration recognizes the importance of renewal of the trade agreement, which is vital to continued expansion of our economic relations. —Urge continued improvement in emigration to the U.S. and express concern at the recent decline in emigration to Israel, noting that the Administration and Congress are interested in both. Our two governments must continue our dialogue on these questions. —Explain that while we understand the advantages of longer-term MFN status, we have concluded that it would be unwise to propose legislative action to modify the Trade Act this year. However, it may be possible in the future to work out a solution to accord MFN status for a longer period.4 —Tell Ceausescu that prospects for long-term MFN would be greatly improved by better emigration performance, particularly to Israel. 2. Economic Relations U.S. Objectives: To reassure Ceausescu that we are interested in continuing to expand economic relations with Romania despite our inability to move ahead as quickly as the Romanians desire in certain areas.5 Ceausescu’s Objectives: To obtain a Presidential commitment that U.S. export controls will be relaxed; that Romania may receive concessionary credits; and that the U.S. Government will take an active role in establishing cooperative industrial projects between American firms and Romanian enterprises. Essential Factors: The U.S. has played an increasingly important role in Romania’s attempt to reduce Soviet economic leverage on Romanian actions. Since 1969 two-way trade has expanded by more than ten times from a meagre base of about $40 million to almost $500 million last year.6 Important stimulants to this expansion were the granting of MFN tariff status to Romanian exports on August 3, 1975 and Romania’s inclusion in the U.S. scheme of generalized tariff preferences (GSP) for developing countries, which has allowed duty-free entry of many Romanian goods since January 1, 1976. 4 Brzezinski highlighted each of the first three points in the margin. 5 Brzezinski underlined “expand economic relations” in this paragraph.
