3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
428
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
We have explained the rationale for the two alternatives for a ban
on new types of ICBMs we have offered, and I continue to believe that
either would lead to an equitable solution of this issue.
As I said at the beginning, the new types issue is one of the most
important political-level issues remaining to be resolved in the agree-
ment. If we are able to reach a satisfactory solution, I believe we will
have made a great stride toward a final agreement.
In recognition of the importance of the issue for the progress of
these negotiations, and in light of those constructive elements of the So-
viet May 1978 proposals, and in an effort to bridge the gap between
your proposals and ours, I am prepared to offer the following
compromise.
I want to emphasize that in our view the new types issue has sev-
eral related elements which apply to both ICBMs and SLBMs: a ban on
new types, a definition of permitted modernization of existing types
which prevents increases in the number of RVs on an existing type; and
possible exemptions for new types. Our new proposal has been de-
signed to resolve all these elements as a whole. It forms an integrated
package and cannot be broken into individual parts.
We are prepared to prohibit testing and deployment of any new
types of ICBMs through 1985, except that each side would be permitted
to flight-test one new type of ICBM, MIRVed or non-MIRVed. How-
ever, deployment of new types of ICBMs would be prohibited through
1985.
—New types of ICBMs would be determined by the definition
which we have proposed, including a ban on an increase in the max-
imum number of reentry vehicles on any existing type of missile. The
exempted ICBM could have no more than 10 reentry vehicles.
—This proposal, when considered in relation to the 820 limit on
MIRVed ICBMs, represents a meaningful arms control step. Yet it gives
both sides flexibility in deciding how to structure its mix of MIRVed
and single warhead ICBMs. We are also prepared to agree to a ban on
new types of SLBMs through 1985, except that one new type of SLBM
could be tested and deployed. The SLBM exemption would apply to
Typhoon on your side and Trident II on our side. The Trident I and the
SS–N–18 would be considered existing SLBMs.
There would be a prohibition on increases in the number of reentry
vehicles for existing types of SLBMs. The maximum number of reentry
vehicles on an exempted SLBM would be 14.
This proposal takes into account the essential elements of the ap-
proaches taken by both sides: you wanted to ban new ICBMs through
1985, and they could be banned. We have sought to obtain equality of
constraints on both sides. It is good arms control and it gives each side
flexibility to structure its own forces.
