plebiscite cannot therefore be regarded as being in itself a breach of the treaty. The
Parties, by Article 3 of the Treaty of Ancon, having left to a future agreement the
conditions of the plebiscite, must be deemed to have thereby agreed that each Party
should have the right to make proposals, and to object to the other’s proposals, so long
as they acted in good faith.
From an examination of the history of the negotiations the Arbitrator is unable to find
any proper basis for the conclusion that Chile acted in bad faith. The record fails to
show that Chile has ever arbitrarily refused to negotiate with Peru the terms of the
plebiscitary protocol. On the contrary, the record shows affirmatively that Chile not
only has accepted Peru’s invitations to proceed with the negotiations but has herself
initiated negotiations. Such causes of delay as a cabinet crisis, a revolution, the illness
of a minister, the death of a president—political contingencies which did not lie beyond
the contemplation of the Parties—cannot be charged to either side as constituting a
wilful refusal to proceed with negotiations. The argument based on the failure of Chile
to ratify the Billinghurst-Latorre protocol of 1898 must proceed on the assumption
either that Chile was bound to ratify that particular agreement or that Chile’s conduct in
relation thereto establishes absence of good faith in the prosecution of the negotiations
pursuant to the treaty. Neither position can be maintained. The Billinghurst-Latorre
protocol provided that two important conditions of the plebiscite, namely, the
qualifications of voters and the secrecy of the vote should be submitted to the
arbitration of the Queen of Spain. Chile had not promised to agree to such an
arbitration and acted within her rights in seeking a direct agreement upon these points.
Nor does Chile’s conduct in relation to the protocol afford ground for a finding of bad
faith. The Executive of Chile negotiated the protocol and the Chilean Senate approved
it. As already stated, the Committee of the Chilean Chamber of Deputies first approved
the protocol and then changed its recommendation and the Chamber of Deputies acted
on the adverse report of the Committee. The Legislature of Chile under the
constitutional system of Chile had the same right to refuse to approve the protocol as
the Executive had to negotiate it and no unfavorable inference can be drawn from the
exercise by the Legislature of its constitutional prerogative in the circumstances
described. The disposition of the Billinghurst-Latorre protocol cannot be regarded as
due to anything other than the normal processes of constitutional government in
relation to a matter of transcendent public interest, nor did Peru even under the stress of
disappointment make the rejection of the protocol a basis for refusing to go on with
negotiations for the fulfillment of the Treaty of Ancon. In considering the obligations of
that treaty, regard must be had as well to the freedom which the Parties enjoyed under
that treaty, by virtue of the fact that the conditions of the plebiscite were left to a future
agreement, as to the duty which the treaty imposed. It must be concluded that Chile
was no more bound to ratify the Billinghurst-Latorre protocol than Peru was bound to
accept later the proposals made by Chile.
