National Security Policy 809 191. Presentation by Kistiakowsky to the President1 Washington, August 4, 1959 MR. PRESIDENT: With your permission I will report to you on three subjects: the progress in global military communications; the problem of ICBM bases; and the problem of nuclear test suspension negotiations. I. As you know, the three Services are involved in planning global communications systems of a most advanced nature which are not closely coordinated. A panel, headed by Dr. W. O. Baker of your Science Advisory Committee, has been looking into the problems of present and future military; communications and especially into the CRITICOMM System. The main emphasis of its findings is that a great deal of improvement is possible with the present type of communica­ tions, by making limited technical changes and additions, and simulta­ neously aiming toward maximum possible sharing of the facilities by the Services. The Director of Defense Research and Engineering and the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Supply and Logistics also have been emphasizing the advantages which may result from the improvements in present facilities over focusing of attention on the as yet unproven future developments. Due to these efforts, there has been a gratifying improvement in the handling of critical messages. For instance, the median-­average-­time for handling such messages is down to 13 min­ utes this June as contrasted with 52 minutes from June to December 1958. [text not declassified] It appears, Mr. President, that the concerted efforts to make the best possible use of the present facilities are bearing fruit and further improvements are definitely to be hoped for. II. In response to Dr. Killian’s memorandum of last winter concerning the cost and complexity of missile bases, the Office of the Secretary of Defense undertook a study of this problem, and General Betts, who conducted the inquiry, just told me informally about his findings. In essence they are these: The complexity of earliest missile bases will be almost beyond imagination. An example is that under the floor of the Command Post at the Vandenberg Air Force Base, controlling only three Atlas missiles, 1 Source: Global military communications; ICBM basing; Geneva disarmament negotiations. Secret. 4 pp. Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, DDE Diaries.
