National Security Policy 1069 Secretary Anderson said he had very little to add to Mr. Gray’s introduction of the subject. He would be agreeable to having the record of the meeting show that the new port security program would include provision for occasional boarding and searching of Sino-­Soviet Bloc vessels prior to their entry into port. He would also be agreeable to hav­ ing the record show that the new port security program would be put into effect in consultation with the Secretaries of State and Defense, the Attorney General, and the Director of Central Intelligence and that he would consult with other interested departments, agencies, and com­ mittees prior to making any modifications in the program. Mr. McCone asked whether he was correct in understanding that all Sino-­Soviet Bloc vessels would be inspected after their entry into port, while only occasional inspections would be made at the barrier to the port. Secretary Anderson said Mr. McCone’s understanding was correct. Mr. Gray pointed out that the Joint Chiefs of Staff had formulated views, in which the Secretary of Defense had concurred, which were consistent with the provision for occasional boarding and searching of Sino-­Soviet Bloc vessels prior to their entry into port. The Joint Chiefs of Staff had indicated that if inspections prior to entry are suspended, thorough and effective inspections after entry must be made. In con­ curring in the cautionary comments by the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Secretary of Defense had recommended that they be brought to the attention of those responsible for implementing port security policy. Mr. Gray understood that the Joint Chiefs of Staff want their views to be on record. He asked whether General White wished to add any­ thing. General White called attention to the fact that the Joint Chiefs has also stated that “continuing emphasis must be given to developing improved techniques for detection of nuclear devices in ships, in ships cargoes, released on harbor bottoms and in channels.” Secretary Gates recalled that at the meeting with the President, referred to by Mr. Gray, the President had indicated that the details of the port security program were not a matter for adoption by the NSC. Mr. Gray agreed that the President had not wished to give his specific approval to the revised port security program but had approved only the general guidelines under which the program would operate, i.e.,
