National Security Policy  1069
Secretary Anderson said he had very little to add to Mr. Gray’s 
introduction of the subject. He would be agreeable to having the record 
of the meeting show that the new port security program would include 
provision for occasional boarding and searching of Sino-­Soviet Bloc 
vessels prior to their entry into port. He would also be agreeable to hav­
ing the record show that the new port security program would be put 
into effect in consultation with the Secretaries of State and Defense, the 
Attorney General, and the Director of Central Intelligence and that he 
would consult with other interested departments, agencies, and com­
mittees prior to making any modifications in the program.
Mr. McCone asked whether he was correct in understanding that all 
Sino-­Soviet Bloc vessels would be inspected after their entry into port, 
while only occasional inspections would be made at the barrier to the 
port. Secretary Anderson said Mr. McCone’s understanding was correct.
Mr. Gray pointed out that the Joint Chiefs of Staff had formulated 
views, in which the Secretary of Defense had concurred, which were 
consistent with the provision for occasional boarding and searching of 
Sino-­Soviet Bloc vessels prior to their entry into port. The Joint Chiefs 
of Staff had indicated that if inspections prior to entry are suspended, 
thorough and effective inspections after entry must be made. In con­
curring in the cautionary comments by the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the 
Secretary of Defense had recommended that they be brought to the 
attention of those responsible for implementing port security policy. 
Mr. Gray understood that the Joint Chiefs of Staff want their views to 
be on record. He asked whether General White wished to add any­
thing. General White called attention to the fact that the Joint Chiefs 
has also stated that “continuing emphasis must be given to developing 
improved techniques for detection of nuclear devices in ships, in ships 
cargoes, released on harbor bottoms and in channels.”
Secretary Gates recalled that at the meeting with the President, 
referred to by Mr. Gray, the President had indicated that the details of 
the port security program were not a matter for adoption by the NSC. 
Mr. Gray agreed that the President had not wished to give his specific 
approval to the revised port security program but had approved only 
the general guidelines under which the program would operate, i.e., 
the revised Paragraph 19 of NSC 5802/1.
The National Security Council:
a. Noted the approval by the President on June 11, 1960, of the revised 
paragraph 19 of NSC 5802/1 transmitted by the reference memoran­
dum of May 16, 1960, following concurrence therein by Memorandum 
Action by the other members of the National Security Council, the 
Secretary of the Treasury, the Attorney General, the Director, Bureau of 
the Budget, and the Chairman, Atomic Energy Commission.
b. Noted the President’s rescission as of June 11, 1960, of the Port 
Security Programs approved by him on April 21, 1958, and his authori­
zation to the Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the Secretary
