Hungary Primate will be invited to be an active participant in the ceremony of return. They have also added that no thought is being given to attendance by any prominent Party leaders. The Hungarian Government has also assured us that the Crown will be treated in a manner fitting to its national, cultural and religious symbolism. As to the question of a church role in guarding the Crown, ever since enactment of a Hungarian law in 1498 during the reign of King Laszlo II, custody of the Crown has rested solely with non-ecclesiastical persons. In July 1976, Cardinal Lekai, the Primate of Hungary, informed our Charge that the Catholic Church in Hungary would very much welcome the return of the Crown, which he considered to be the country’s most precious symbol. He added that both the Church and the State were carefully preserving and restoring Hungary’s historical treasures and that the historical past of the country would be respected, taught and studied. While the Hungarian Government may consult the Hungarian churches concerning the presentation and guarding of the Crown, we believe that this matter is best left for discussion between the Hungarian Government and the various Hungarian church organizations. 3. Free Access to the Crown The Hungarian Government has assured us, at the highest levels, that the Crown will be promptly placed on permanent exhibition in an appropriate historical location in Budapest and that the population of Hungary, Hungarians everywhere and foreigners alike, will be welcome to view it. Such open, permanent display will be in marked contrast to past practice, which provided for only rare public display of the Crown. 4. Emphasize the People-to-People Aspect of the Return We fully agree that the “people-to-people” aspect of return is very important. The Hungarian Government appears to have accepted our suggestion in this respect without reservation. We believe that the US delegation should include prominent Americans from various walks of life. With regard to the suggestion that the role of US Government officials be minimized, we believe that Members of Congress, as elected representatives of the American people, should be included in the delegation along with at least several Executive Branch representatives and that full consideration must be given to a Government official as the delegation head. Tip O’Neill wrote me strongly suggesting that House members be included. The US Catholic Conference of Bishops has asked whether they might make some suggestions for the delegation.
