that the words “and all premises thereto appertaining” in the fifth line of the
Article in the draft be placed immediately after the newly inserted words.
Article III will then read as follows:
“The dwellings, warehouses, manufacturies, shops, and other
places of business, and all premises thereto appertaining of the
nationals of each of the High Contracting Parties in the territories
of the other, used for any purposes set forth in Article I, shall be
respected. It shall not be allowable to make a domiciliary visit to,
or search of any such buildings and premises, or there to examine
and inspect books, papers or accounts, except under the
conditions and in conformity with the forms prescribed by the
laws, ordinances and regulations for nationals.”
This is one of the changes introduced in the negotiation of the Treaty with
Germany.
Article IV. This Government desires that there be inserted in the tenth line
of the first paragraph of Article IV after the word “Party”, the words
“whether resident or nonresident”, the rest of the paragraph and article to
remain unchanged. This also is a change resulting from the negotiations
with Germany. The words “whether resident or nonresident” appear in the
second paragraph of this Article, and expressing them in the first paragraph
has the advantage of giving uniformity of phraseology where difference
might give rise to a question whether a difference of meaning is intended.
Article V. Austria proposes to modify the provisions in this Article
regarding the right to conduct religious services by the proviso that the
teachings and practices are not inconsistent with public order or public
morals, and that they conform to all laws or regulations duly established,
and to replace the word “reasonable”, as used with reference to mortuary
and sanitary laws and regulations, with the word “established”.
The proposed amendments of Article V appear to the Department to entail
no substantial modification in the meaning of the Article and very little
change in form. In view of your report that Austria attaches considerable
importance to the suggestions with respect to the modification of Article V
because it is desired to bring that Article into close harmony with
