376 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV and defense costs; they are examples of the additions that need to be made in order to offset the military and perceptual advantages that the Soviets have been accumulating. They are opportunities: advantageous if taken (or, rather, bought); useless if forgone. 1. M–X. Next decision is full-­scale development, separately or in a joint program with Trident C–5 missile. Without it, we will not have even by the late 1980’s a quick-­response hard-­target capability comparable to that the Soviets will possess early in the 1980’s. A related question is survivability, both short-­term and enduring.3 2. Alternate launch point land-­based system. Some mobile system of this kind (there are two or three alternatives) can assure a survivable land-­based ICBM, not dependent on warning, provided a solution can be found to the outstanding technical and cost problems. Other alternatives for increasing survivability will have comparable costs, but different balances of military value and political difficulties.4 3. B–X. A new bomber, of range and payload comparable with that of Backfire, but more effective, because of recent very significant technological advances, of which you are aware. This bomber would be greatly superior to the Backfire (and the B–1) in ability to penetrate air defenses because of a combination of low detectability features, improved countermeasures and improved defensive systems. It would be particularly effective in combination with a cruise missile attack because the “fixes” to the Soviet air defense required for the cruise missiles would be at cross-­purposes with those required for the bomber (and vice versa). As you are aware, we could start full-­scale development of such a bomber as early as 1979 and achieve IOC by 1984. Juxtaposition with B–1 could pose some political problems, but also has some potential for political justification—­as you know, we had it in mind when the B–1 was cancelled.5 4. [1 paragraph (6 lines) not declassified] 5. GLCM. One way to offset Soviet long-­range theater nuclear forces. At the protocol deployment limit of 600 km, GLCMs (and SLCMs) cannot reach the Soviet Union from the FRG, though Soviet 600-­km GLCMs from East Europe (or SLCMs) can reach all of FRG. But at the 2500-­km test range limit, GLCMs can reach much of European U.S.S.R. from the FRG and the U.K. (as can SLCMs of that range from the oceans adjacent to Europe). These systems are in full-­scale development—­the next issue is deployment. To deploy in the early 1980’s will require acceleration of the process of making basing arrangements, planning targeting, etc.6 3 Carter wrote “ok?” in the right margin next to this paragraph. 4 Carter wrote “?” in the right margin next to this paragraph. 5 Carter wrote “no” in the right margin next to this paragraph. 6 Carter wrote “ok?” in the right margin next to this paragraph.
