1956 983 on their draft, the two months would carry the meetings through the completion of a full year and beyond the time of Nehru’s visit here. It is possible that they are looking toward a break-­off around that time if no progress is made. We have been debating whether to ask O’Neill to make new repre­ sentations in Peiping. We had a copy of a despatch from him last Friday in which he discusses the advisability of such a move. The principal reason we have hesitated to go ahead is that we believe Clifford and Phillips both have three-­year sentences which will be up about mid-­ June if the Communists follow their usual procedure of making them retroactive to the date of arrest. If we should present a strong note to the Communists via O’Neill just at this time it might cause them to delay the release of these two so that it wouldn’t appear that the release came about as a result of “pressure”. We would appreciate having your views on this. We have still been unable to reach complete agreement with the representatives of the sixteen regarding action to be taken on the NNSC. Some progress has been made. All agree that the conference on Korea should be rejected, in the absence of any evidence that the ­Communists have changed their attitude. All have now accepted, in principle, the necessity of unilateral action to remove the NNSC to the demilitarized zone. Difference of opinion now revolves around the tim­ ing and form of this action. The Commonwealth countries and France are holding out for an interval between announcing our proposed action in the MAC and carrying it out. The interval proposed ranges from six or seven days to five weeks. We have been trying to get agree­ ment on reducing the interval or, better still, eliminating it, as we fear that we will just be providing the Communists with an opportunity to make propaganda and work on the neutralists during the interval. Also, there is the constant danger of incidents in Korea during such a period. There will probably be another meeting of the sixteen this week to reach final agreement. We have now received the second section of the W. L. White report on Communist treatment of POW’s. There is more to come. If we can get more copies we will send you one—so far Defense has furnished only one copy for all interested offices in the Department. Mr. Hoover asked for an evaluation of the project to date and there is enclosed a memorandum from Bill Sebald to him giving our views. We have sent you a copy of a memorandum prepared for Mr. ­Robertson reporting on the latest developments in Congress relating to imprisoned Americans. Interest in this subject appears to be mounting and it may not be possible much longer to discourage the interested committees from holding public hearings.
