3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 July–December 1979 631 again respectfully request that you tell the public what is known about this agreement, and about Soviet military activities in Cuba. Last Friday and Saturday,3 major news organizations quoted senior administration officials4 as conceding that “they had received intelligence that the Soviet Union was setting up a high-ranking command structure in Cuba.” Further, these officials were quoted as saying that “this command structure would be able to handle a brigade-size force, while insisting that no such force has been brought to Cuba.” Mr. President, in my view the continuation of such a command structure by the Soviet Union in Cuba does constitute Soviet efforts to establish a military base. Therefore, I ask that you take appropriate steps to effect its removal.5 Sincerely, Richard (Dick) Stone 3 July 20–21. 4 See “Soviet Brigade Reported in Cuba,” Chicago Tribune, July 21, 1979, p. A4; and “Network Says Soviets Sent Brigade to Cuba,” The Washington Post, July 21, 1979, p. A6. 5 Vance’s response to Stone, which outlines the history of a Soviet presence in Cuba, is printed in the Department of State Bulletin, October 1979, p. 63. 211. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for Domestic Affairs and Policy (Eizenstat) to President Carter1 Washington, August 9, 1979 I received a call today from Avital Scharansky, the wife of Anatoly Scharansky. She reported that Mr. Scharansky’s mother and brother saw him in prison two days ago. Their report to her was that he had been very sick since February and was growing worse, that he could neither read nor write at this point, was having severe headaches, and had experienced a drastic loss of weight. She stated that he was getting little, if any, medical help. She made a personal appeal that you petition the Russians for his release on the grounds of his physical condition. She said she under- 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 83, USSR: 8/80. Personal and Confidential. A copy of the memorandum was sent to Brzezinski. Carter wrote in the upper right-hand corner, “Zbig—Tell Cy to do this. J.”
