Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980 793 lions more in its wake. It is beyond the power of words to describe the horror of a nuclear holocaust. It would dwarf all the accumulated barbarities and cruelties of mankind’s long history put together. More people would die in a few hours than in all the wars of all nations since the dawn of recorded history. Most of us seldom think seriously about the possibility of nuclear war. But as the President of the United States, entrusted with the power to unleash that force, charged with the responsibility to bend every effort of mind and heart and will to see to it that it need never be unleashed, then it is something I think about every day and every night of my life. Over the last 20 years we’ve taken some tentative steps away from the nuclear precipice. Now, for the first time, we are being advised to take steps that may move us toward it. A few days ago my opponent in the current election campaign promised to scrap the nuclear arms treaty we’ve already signed. He said, and I quote, “The one card that’s been missing in these negotiations is the possibility of an arms race.”2 He also urges that we seek nuclear superiority. His position—and I think I state it accurately—is that by abandoning the current agreement and suggesting an all-out nuclear arms race, we could perhaps frighten the Soviets into negotiating a new agreement on the basis of American nuclear superiority. I’ve had 4 years of sobering experience in this life-and-death field, and in my considered judgment this would be a very risky gamble. It is most unlikely that it would lead to any new agreement. A much more likely result would be an uncontrolled nuclear arms race and almost certainly a new rupture in Soviet-American relations. The long, slow momentum of arms control would be broken. Any future effort to negotiate arms limits—for example, on antisatellite systems, on nuclear weapons tests, on conventional and nuclear arms in Europe—would all be imperiled. 2 During a September 30 interview with Associated Press reporters, Reagan offered this statement in response to questions as to whether he would begin arms talks with Soviet leaders at present military strength levels or wait until the United States had achieved parity with the Soviet Union. Reagan commented that the Soviets would “be more inclined to negotiate in good faith” if they knew that the United States “is engaged in building up its military.” Responding to a follow-on question if this meant that the United States should not wait to start new negotiations, Reagan asserted: “No, I think that if you start, they know our industrial strength. They know our capacity. The one card that’s been missing in these negotiations has been the possibility of an arms race. Now the Soviets have been racing, but with no competition. No one else is racing. Now they know the difference between their industrial power and ours. And so I think that we’d get a lot farther at the table if they know that as they continue, they’re faced with our industrial capacity and all that we can do.” (“Reagan Would Toughen U.S. Stand on Arms Pact,” and “Excerpts From Reagan Interview on Policies He Would Follow,” both The New York Times, October 2, 1980, p. B–13)
