Romania
659
211.
Memorandum From Stephen Larrabee of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, December 10, 1978
SUBJECT
Summary Report on Secretary Blumenthal’s Trip to Romania, December 8–9,
1978 (U)
Secretary Blumenthal is preparing a report for the President on his
trip to Romania and his discussions while in Bucharest.2 However, I
thought it might be useful for me to give you a brief summary of the
trip and some of my own impressions. (U)
Bonn, December 7–8
Shortly after arriving, I was called to the American Embassy to
brief Secretary Blumenthal on the background and purpose of his trip
to Romania. Initially he was a bit concerned about how the trip would
be viewed in Moscow and its impact on the improved atmosphere
in US–Soviet relations which had been evident during his talks with
Brezhnev and Kosygin several days previously. He felt that some men-
tion should be made of the economic aspects of his trip, as this was
his main responsibility. Moreover, the Romanians themselves had sug-
gested that the trip should be billed as an exchange on economic as
well as political matters.3 He also suggested some changes in the text
of his arrival statement, including the elimination of the word “inde-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
File, Box 66, Romania: 6/78–3/79. Secret. Sent for information. Printed from an unini-
tialed copy.
2 Secretary Blumenthal’s report has not been found. Blumenthal did prepare a
memorandum of conversation of his meeting with Andrei during the December 8 recep-
tion. Andrei discussed the Warsaw Pact meeting describing it as “extremely difficult”
because of the differences between Bucharest and Moscow on defense budgets, relations
with the PRC, and the Camp David Accords. Concerning Soviet pressure on Romania,
Andrei told Blumenthal that the Romanians “judged the risk to be small. Militarily, he
said, ‘we are not Czechoslovakia’ and ‘we have made certain preparations and would
be ready.’ Economic pressures, if they occur, would cause some difficulty but Romania
could handle them.” (Ibid.)
3 In telegram 308520 to Moscow, Bonn, and Bucharest, December 7, the Department
forwarded cleared Bucharest remarks for Blumenthal. The statement stressed that he
was visiting Romania at President Carter’s direction to reaffirm “the importance we
attach to Romania’s independence and to U.S.-Romanian friendship.” The visit was also to
highlight “the value we place on the constructive role that Romania plays in international
affairs.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P840139–1710) Blumen-
thal responded to the White House in telegram 22376 from Bonn, December 7, suggesting
some changes. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P850104–2477)
