3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–June 1979
549
(C) Soviet policy is to regularize as soon as practical the criteria for
refusal based on national security considerations.
D) The Soviet Union has no intention of changing the foregoing
policies.
—In connection with this matter, we appreciate recent moves re-
garding some refusenik hardship cases and prisoners. We would con-
sider it of particular symbolic value if exit permission were given to
more of those prominent cases known to Ambassador Dobrynin from
his own contacts with Jewish leaders. End text.
Vance
191.
Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the
Department of State1
Moscow, May 3, 1979, 1510Z
10906. Subject: (C) Leadership Update: Brezhnev’s Health, Other
Recent Observations and Rumors. Ref: Moscow 10711.2
1. (C-entire text)
2. Brezhnev’s health. Recent observations suggest that Brezhnev is
becoming increasingly feeble and that greater efforts are being made by
the Soviet media to hide this fact. We have reported separately on
Brezhnev’s performance during the Franco-Soviet summit (reftel). The
French found his condition markedly deteriorated from two years ago,
when he last met Giscard. At the moment, Brezhnev is still able, though
perhaps with increasing difficulty, to rally himself sufficiently to get
through major appearances and meetings. How long he can do so will
depend on whether the gradual deterioration in his condition can be
arrested.
3. Brezhnev on TV. We have frequently noted that film of Leonid
Il’ich is edited to show him in the best possible light. A recent example
was the “Vremya” coverage of his speaking performance at the Su-
preme Soviet session, in which the awkward moments were elimi-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Europe, USSR
and East/West, Western Europe Country File, Box 4, Chron: 5/1–7/79. Confidential. Sent
for information to the Consulate in Leningrad. Sent under a covering memorandum, May
4, from Stephen Larrabee (NSC) to Brzezinski. (Ibid.)
2 Telegram 10711 from Moscow, April 30, is in the National Archives, RG 59, Cen-
tral Foreign Policy File, D790201–0222.
