352  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
Keeny began the debate by declaring that there is no meaning in 
the sentence, “Perception of the overall balance should not be marked 
by major asymmetries.”
Harold Brown defended this Defense language, arguing that it 
means we must either reduce the asymmetries or change the perceptions.
Brzezinski asked why the State version spoke of saving “popula-
tion” but omitted reference to “leadership”?
Harold Brown suggested adding “government continuity,” not 
“leadership” which has political overtones raising a question of which 
leaders will be saved.
Christopher objected to “coerce us in time of crisis.” He prefers the 
term “crisis management” as a broader term. Harold Brown agreed, but 
Dr. Brzezinski did not. He suggested inserting “to stable crisis manage-
ment” in the policy statement directly before the phrase “coerce us . . .”
Dr. Brzezinski then observed that the public declaratory policy 
statement should be changed by replacing the words “modest improve-
ments” with “continuing improvements” because the word “modest” 
could invite public and Congressional criticism.
Harold Brown expressed the fear that this would be an open ended 
commitment.
Brzezinski replied that “continuing” or “gradual” are quite good 
words in the declaratory policy for avoiding an open ended interpre-
tation. Dr. Brzezinski also proposed that “to some degree” be removed 
from the public declaratory policy statement. Upon Brown’s objection 
to that change, Dr. Brzezinski offered “in part” in place of “to some 
degree.”
Harold Brown then proposed wording along the lines of “Although 
civil defense has only a limited effect on the overall strategic balance 
and crisis stability, the program should also contribute in these regards.
General Smith objected to State’s version, insisting that “surviv-
ability” would depend upon a number of factors as the last part of the 
DOD proposed statement indicates. “Among other factors” is omit-
ted from the State version. General Smith wanted it included. Harold 
Brown agreed.
Brown then asked Keeny if ACDA would drop its alternative 
proposal?3
Keeny answered no. A real policy issue is being side stepped, he 
argued. Are we tying our policy to insurance, or are we, as is the case 
of the Defense and State version, tying civil defense to the strategic bal-
ance? This is not a small issue. The President should realize that it is 
3 The ACDA alternative proposal was not found.
