218 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III —Following earlier German measures in June, the further German steps will have only a limited effect on German growth in 1977, which is likely to fall about 1% below Summit growth targets; these additional German measures should, however, contribute to improved growth performance in 1978. Germany runs a decreasing but still substantial surplus on current account. —The Japanese expansion program will probably raise growth in FY 1977 to about the pledged 6.7%. It portends little early reduction in Japanese external surplus;8 the Japanese Prime Minister has accepted the necessity “to strive for an external equilibrium”, and some initial measures to this end have been announced. Despite a recent slow-down, the United States should achieve its Summit growth target for 1977. The US current account deficit is very large and does not seem to be diminishing; part of this deficit is due to increasing oil imports, as the US economy grows. This deficit poses a potential problem for US policy because of its size, while large surpluses are being incurred simultaneously by other strong economies. Unemployment has remained too high in all three of the strong economies; it has been slightly drifting up in Japan and Germany, and down in the United States. Inflation in Germany and Japan has declined—to 4% and 7–8%, respectively; it seems stuck around 6% in the United States. All three countries are concerned to curb inflationary pressures. Canada’s real growth for 1977 will be less than the 4% projected at the Summit; unemployment will also be higher than expected. Canada’s inflation rate is running at about 7.5%, and it continues to run a substantial deficit on current account. What can be learned from this record? Summit commitments appear to have had a useful effect on the participants’ policies. Both the German and Japanese governments have referred to these commitments in announcing expansionist measures. The obstacles to effective and timely concert of the industrial nations’ domestic policies are substantial. Economic trends cannot readily be predicted with accuracy; they depend on the decisions of millions of consumers and investors. Nor can these trends be altered quickly by public policies, which have to be agreed by diverse political and economic groups before they can be put into effect; and their results may be altered or offset by unanticipated movements in private consump- 8 Carter underlined the phrase “It portends little early reduction in Japanese external surplus” and wrote at the end of the paragraph: “We might be facing an unpleasant dialogue—Japan is blocking imports.”
