January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981 1323 eral responsiveness to our exercise requests, Egypt would be much more likely to allow us to deploy sizable ground/air forces early in a crisis than Oman, the only other country with facilities within C–130 range. Oman is particularly unlikely to accept such deployments at Seeb, which is the closest Omani area to likely PG operations. (S) Ras Banas is beyond the combat radius of potential hostile tacair forces. It is located astride both the primary sea and air LOCs to the region and between 150–250 miles from Saudi Red Sea ports. Only 800nm from Abadan, it is within C–130 radius of the Gulf. Furthermore, by the end of 1981 when refineries at Yanbu and Jiddah are completed, Ras Banas will have easy and direct sea access to POL. A rear-staging complex there would greatly shorten deployment times. For example, the combat elements of a pre-deployed air mobile or airborne division brigade could be moved to Dharan within 3–4 days. Finally Ras Banas is not located near any major Egyptian population center. (S) As to rear support basing, we see Ras Banas as an entering wedge which would facilitate more extensive use of Egyptian rear bases in event of a major contingency. Egypt has far more in the way of skilled labor, industrial base, and other infrastructure than Oman and Somalia combined. If the US were willing to fund construction of Ras Banas, I believe Sadat would allow us full emergency use. I further believe that, if we agree to overbuild Ras Banas, Sadat will in turn agree to allow us to use it 2–3 times a year for exercises. (S) Ras Banas may also turn out to be the preferred site for B–52 interdiction operations. It is much closer to Abadan (800 nm) than Diego Garcia (2700 nm). It is far less real-estate limited than Diego Garcia, though we might have less freedom to use it. (S) In sum, access to Ras Banas would critically complement the facilities agreed upon with Oman and Kenya, and potentially with Somalia, which are mostly for naval and air use. They need to be complemented by a sizable ground force facility. If we can also preposition certain stocks there (e.g. ammo and POL) it would radically cut down on airlift requirements. Estimated Costs (S) We want to develop Ras Banas in a carefully phased manner. The first phase outlined below will meet initial staging base and rear support base requirements. A second and necessary third phase can be negotiated later, when our further needs have been analyzed. (S) Phase I: Construction during FY 82–83, with capability to support full surge operations, pre-deployment of an Army brigade and AF tac fighter squadron, plus port upgrade to SL–7 (Ro/Ro) capability.
