380
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
“But,” added the Crown Prince with a somewhat mischievous
grin, “Let me tell you what I have done to guarantee that the Summit
will not get out of hand and be used by the Iraqis and the Libyans to
condemn Egypt and the moderate Arabs.”
“Just after the attempted coup in North Yemen on October 19”,
Fahd said, “President Salih of North Yemen called and said he wanted
to break off relations with Iraq and Libya because they were behind the
attempted coup.”
“Salih told me that sometime ago one of the YAR ministers met
Qadhafi at a Libyan national celebration and that he (Qadhafi) said he
had been fearing disturbing things about a possible uprising or revolt
in YAR. He seemed to intend it as a friendly warning.”
“I told Salih”, Fahd said, “that Qadhafi reminded me of the old
Arab proverb of the man who commits the murder and then becomes a
pall-bearer at the victim’s funeral!”
“Salih sent FonMin Abdullah Asnaj to see me,” Fahd said, “and I
advised him not to break off relations with these two countries, but to
let them stew in their own juice for a while. I suggested, however, that
YAR come to the Baghdad Summit prepared to raise that issue if the
Rejectionists say anything nasty about Egypt.”
“Both Asnaj and Salih have agreed to this,” Fahd concluded, “and
what do you think of this as a political maneuver?” he asked.
“A masterpiece, literally a stroke of genius” I replied.
“I also have had a visit, at my request, from Abdul Hamid Sharaf,
Chief of the Royal Diwan of Jordan,” Fahd said. “I explained to him our
policy and told him to tell King Hussein that he should encourage the
West Bankers and Palestinians to join the peace process. Hussein
would thus exhibit his renowned courage and we would support him.
He should urge the “inside” (West Bank and Gaza) Palestinians to
agree to the Camp David agreements even if he (Hussein) could not yet
openly do the same. I asked Sharaf to impress on his King that I think
President Carter wants to see nothing but good happen to his Arab
friends. Now is the time to support this unique friend, Carter, I
concluded.”7
“I sent Prince Saud to the Gulf countries (Tonight he is in Oman) in
order to explain our policy and urge them to take the right stand at the
Baghdad Summit.”
Fahd next turned to the question of the PLO. “I am inviting Arafat
to come to Saudi Arabia,” he said, “and I am going to talk plainly and
7 Brzezinski drew a vertical line in the left-hand margin adjacent to this paragraph.
