1979  553
Dr. Brzezinski responded by noting that our requirements for C3I 
and civil defense could only be understood if we discussed the roles 
they would play in crisis bargaining scenarios. (S)
Secretary Brown agreed that while we should relate targeting to 
these issues, the targeting study is not cast in these terms. He noted 
that the question at hand was what should be the thrust of our targeting 
policy. (C)
Mr. Keeny then said that many things in the study are very diffi-
cult to discuss because the study presents little information on what we 
would have to buy if we accept its recommendations. (C)
Secretary Brown noted that the first question is what to do with 
what we have. (U)
Mr. Keeny rebutted by saying that our employment policy has 
implications for our acquisition policy. (U)
Secretary Brown noted that we have traditionally separated employ-
ment from acquisition by discussing employment in terms of what 
should be done with the available forces. Acquisition was then dis-
cussed separately in terms of the degree to which the agreed employ-
ment objectives were met. (C)
Mr. Keeny then commented that we must understand the declar-
atory policy issue before we proceed with the study’s recommenda-
tions. (C)
Dr. Brzezinski responded by stating what we should first decide 
what we need, and then establish how we should package or explain 
it. (C)
Mr. Aaron proposed a middle course, specifically that we talk about 
targeting issues, but then test our resulting ideas against Dr. Brzezinski’s 
questions. (C)
He went on to make the point that stability at one level can be 
the enemy of deterrence at another level. For example, overall stra-
tegic superiority may create a very stable situation with respect to 
deterring Soviet military initiatives, but be very destabilizing in the 
degree to which it encourage Soviet efforts to improve and expand 
their forces. (S)
He also noted his concern about the impact of our discussion of 
these issues on our own and our Allies’ confidence. He suggested that 
many who discuss these issues give us less than proper credit for our 
real capabilities. (U)
Secretary Vance noted that he shares this concern. (U)
Secretary Brown commented that Mr. Aaron’s last point had more 
to do with the adequacy to our strategic posture than the targeting 
issues. (U)
