874
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
329.
Message From the Swiss Chargé to Iran (Kaiser) to the
Department of State1
Tehran, July 30, 1980
Letter from U.S. Congressmen2
1) The delivery, which was delayed by the resignation of the chief
of protocol, and which finally could be arranged by one of his deputies,
took place last night at 7 p.m Since Rafsanjani speaks only Persian and
Arabic, I had taken along one of this Embassy’s translators to the
appointment. In accordance with State Department instructions,3 I
stressed the independent initiative of the 187 congressmen, who had
by no means acted on the orders of the Executive, and emphasized
that the reader of this letter must become aware of the serious desire
of these congressmen to end this crisis situation as quickly as possible
and in a peaceful manner protecting the honor of all sides. Finally, I
requested the speaker to bring the letter to the attention of all parliamen-
tarians at the most suitable moment. After Rafsanjani had been read
the content of the letter in Persian, he agreed to acquaint the Parliament
with the text at a favorable opportunity,4 and then began a monologue
lasting almost half an hour in answer of the letter. He then asked me
to transmit this reaction to the congressmen.
Rafsanjani declared that if the U.S. Government were really inter-
ested in a peaceful solution, it would have had to take a much more
1 Source: Department of State, Official Files of [P] David D. Newsom, Under Secre-
tary of State for Political Affairs, Lot 82D85, Iran Update Aug 1980. No classification
marking. Attached to a July 31 briefing memorandum from Saunders to Muskie, Christo-
pher, and Newsom.
2 See Document 309.
3 In a July 8 message from the Department, the Swiss Embassy was instructed to
share the contents of the letter with Bani-Sadr and Ghotbzadeh, and then deliver it to
Sahabi. The Swiss Embassy was to tell Sahabi that the letter was a congressional initiative
taken independently of the Executive branch and that the letter “describes a sincere
desire on the part of the Congress to end the crisis with Iran as quickly as possible in
a peaceful and honorable manner.” (Message attached to a July 7 briefing memorandum
from Saunders to Muskie, Christopher, and Newsom; Department of State, Official Files
of [P] David D. Newsom, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, Lot 82D85, Iran
Update July 1980)
4 According to a July 31 message from Kaiser, Rafsanjani read the letter to the
Majles July 30 but blocked a debate on its contents, promising that U.S.-Iranian relations
would be debated soon. Kaiser reported that Rafsanjani told the Tehran Times that “these
problems cannot be solved peacefully,” and that in exchange for every step toward
solution of the hostage crisis, the United States had to admit that its actions toward Iran
had been “inhuman and that mistakes have been made.” (Department of State, Official
Files of [P] David D. Newsom, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, Lot 82D85,
Iran Update August 1980)
