It will be observed that some of the enclosures to this report are copies rather than originals. Some of the originals are being kept in the files of the Delegation pending the conclusion of the Conference and others are required for current use. It should be stated also that the files of the Delegation will be kept intact until the close of the Conference after which they will be forwarded to the Department pursuant to the Department’s telegraphic instruction No. 297, October 19, 1925, 6 p.m.12 A further report summarizing the work of the Conference from this date will be forwarded when final adjournment shall have taken place, which probably will be some months hence. The Delegation has endeavored, as occasion arose, to keep the Department informed of important developments of the Conference and it has, in general, exerted the utmost effort to reduce the administrative expense to a minimum. Considering the unusual conditions in Peking, and the length of the Conference, the Delegation feels that, in comparison with the amount expended by other Delegations, notably the Japanese, the cost has been small. Normally the purpose for which the Conference was called would have been fulfilled long before now, but not since the fall of the Manchu regime in 1911 have conditions in China been so unsettled. The obstacles which have confronted the Conference, so far as the political situation is concerned, have ranged from the mere disappearance of the Chief Chinese Delegate, C. T. Wang, in March, to a state of siege in April, for the control of Peking by the Kuominchun Army on one side and the Chang Tso-lin and Wu Pei-fu Armies on the other, followed by the complete disappearance of a Government. The period from January 1 to the present has been one during which there have been many Cabinet changes, so numerous that no attempt will be made to enumerate them all. Dr. C. T. Wang took office as Minister for Foreign Affairs on January 11, and a little over a month later (February 18), Premier Hsu abandoned office and fled from Peking. It was about this time that Dr. Wang and other Cabinet members and leaders of the Kuominchun were finding themselves in an increasingly uncomfortable position as the offensive by the Allied armies of Chang Tso-lin and Wu Pei-fu had begun against the Kuominchun. The Allied troops had already made steady
