Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III North-South issues. (See Tab A.)2 These questions were intended to provide a basis for the study of foreign aid that the Personal Representatives had been asked at the Venice Summit to undertake for the Ottawa Summit. It was agreed that each Personal Representative should submit short answers to these questions, which would be discussed at the next meeting of the Personal Representatives. (I have asked the US agencies concerned to prepare these draft answers.) The next meeting will be February 18 and 19, with a dinner beforehand on February 17. The United Kingdom Personal Representative indicated that HMG might host the meeting in London. Three people per country should attend. (The US Delegation to such meetings has consisted in the past of the US Personal Representative, the Under Secretary of the Treasury for Monetary Affairs, and the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs.) After discussion of these questions by the Personal Representatives in February, they will agree on how the paper reflecting that discussion should be prepared for the Ottawa Summit. A 4–5 page introduction, dealing with the wider policy framework within which these questions is to be addressed, will be prepared by Horst Schulman, the German Personal Representative. 3. Other Economic Issues. At lunch on December 10, these issues were discussed: (a) Macro-Economic Policy. The first step in planning the Ottawa Summit discussion of macro-economic issues will be to ask someone to perform the function that Charlie Schultze has undertaken to the satisfaction of Summit governments in the past—i.e., to prepare a paper on macro-economic prospects and policies for the Summit Preparatory Group. The general expectation was that this person will be Charlie Schultze’s successor as head of EPC Bureau of the seven Summit nations’ macro-economic experts. The new head of the US Council of Economic Advisers will be asked to host a March meeting of this Bureau in Washington, where he will presumably also be asked to head the Bureau and write this paper. The Canadian Personal Representative will raise this matter at the February Personal Representatives’ meeting. (b) International Monetary Policy. Whether, and if so how, the Ottawa Summit might address international monetary issues, including the substitution account, will be considered at the Personal Representatives’ February meeting. (c) Nuclear Fuel Supply. There was a brief discussion of whether the Ottawa Summit should consider the issue of US nuclear fuel supply for Europe and Japan. The Personal Representatives agreed that the US 2 Tab A, attached but not printed, is an undated and unsigned list of 21 questions entitled “Aid and Other Contributions to Developing Countries—Consolidated Short List of Questions.”
