500.A 4 e/439: Telegram [Document 709] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State PEKING, October 26, 1925. [Received October 28—9:42 a.m.] Summary number 1. Tariff Conference opened this morning at 10 a.m., presided over by Shen Jui-lin, Minister for Foreign Affairs and chairman of the Chinese delegation, who was chosen chairman of the conference by acclamation upon nomination of Mr. Oudendijk, Netherlands Minister and senior minister. The Chief Executive of the Provisional Government, Marshal Tuan Chi-jui, delivered brief address of welcome and after referring to Washington Conference and particularly to section 1 of article I of nine-power treaty, stated that Chinese people attached great import to this declaration and that an opportunity would be provided at this conference for its realization. He renewed the claim for tariff autonomy and on this subject made following statement: “The idea of tariff autonomy is not a new one, it is an inherent right of a sovereign nation. We, therefore, trust that friendly nations, actuated by spirit of equality and mutuality, will appreciate our position. The existing tariff regime in China is contrary to economic principles, and consequent loss of revenue to us cannot be fully estimated. It is true that with enforcement of the national tariff and the revision of rates, the burden of the importers will be somewhat increased. It will, however, remove the disadvantages under which the Chinese people have long been laboring, thereby improving their financial conditions, increasing their purchasing power and help develop their infant industries. China is recognized as one of the great markets of the World. The improvement of her financial condition[s], the growth of her wealth and the development of her industries will not only be a blessing to herself but also a source of benefit to the friendly nations. Believing that selfaggrandizement is a step to self-destruction and that mutual assistance is the basis of mutual salvation, my expectations grant [expectation is great] that this conference will be guided by the principle of equality and mutuality. Furthermore, the general feeling of unrest and dissatisfaction [,either] within a nation or between nations, may be traced to economic inequality. The establishment of a tariff regime in China on a basis of equality is the means towards stabilizing the economical reparations [economic relations] between China and the World, and forms the foundation of international [peace].”
