Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks 25 form with any agreements reached during negotiations. The four approaches are: 1. No Agreement: Do not seek an agreement limiting ASAT systems. This does not preclude initiatives to further limit the likelihood of peacetime interference. For example, the U.S. could propose under the existing Agreement on Measures to Reduce the Risk of Outbreak of Nuclear War, to show restraint in ASAT testing during crises. 2. Emphasis on Peacetime Problems: Do not attempt to limit the capabilities of ASAT system but focus on peacetime problems and on establishment of thresholds for use. We would propose a peacetime sanctuary for all satellites. 3. Selected Limits: Seek bans on types of systems which do not yet exist, such as high-altitude interceptors and laser weapons in space, but permit each side to test and deploy low-altitude ASAT interceptors, electronic warfare, and ground-based laser ASAT systems. 4. Relatively Comprehensive Agreement: Seek a relatively comprehensive agreement which would ban all ASAT capabilities except electronic warfare. Electronic warfare is excluded because of verification difficulties. The ban would prohibit testing, deployment or use of any ASAT for physical attack on satellites. The current Soviet orbital interceptor would be dismantled. —A variant (4A) would be a fully comprehensive ban on all forms of ASAT including electronic warfare. AGENCY POSITIONS [1 paragraph (4 lines) not declassified] State and ACDA favor a comprehensive ban on ASAT systems in order to avoid cycles of action-reaction competition. Such an agreement would enhance the survivability of U.S. satellites, on which we increasingly depend for intelligence collection, verification, early warning, and communications. A ban on testing, deployment, and use of ASAT systems would contribute to stability by easing concerns about preemptive attack on critical satellites. The present Soviet interceptor is relatively unsophisticated; future Soviet ASAT systems would be much more difficult to counter. Measures short of a comprehensive approach would permit an expansion of Soviet ASAT capabilities, which would make maintaining the survivability of U.S. satellites more difficult. Verification would be difficult, but testing and in some cases construction of an ASAT system would be subject to observation. State and ACDA favor Approach 4. In the OSD view, antisatellite negotiations should be directed toward a ban on peacetime interference. Such a ban would reinforce the principle of noninterference in peacetime and establish a threshold beyond which specific actions will be considered hostile. This approach
