Yugoslavia
881
269.
National Intelligence Estimate1
NIE 15–79
Washington, September 25, 1979
PROSPECTS FOR POST-TITO YUGOSLAVIA
I. INTRODUCTION
1. The early 1980s will probably be a time of troubles in Yugoslavia.
The precipitant will be the incapacitation or death of President Josip
Broz Tito, whose role in the creation and preservation of contemporary
Yugoslavia has been so large that one cannot be confident it will prove
dispensable.
2. On balance, our confidence on this score is lower now than it
was at the time of our last estimate in 1973. During the past several
years, and especially since the June 1978 Yugoslav Party Congress, a
number of developments which had seemed conducive to a relatively
smooth and orderly post-Tito succession have lost momentum. Simul-
taneously, a number of countervailing developments have ensued. In
particular, the institutionalization of an effective central policymaking
process has virtually stopped, while economic “stagflation” has per-
sisted, and Yugoslav-Soviet relations have further deteriorated.
3. We remain fairly confident that Tito’s passing, in and of itself,
will not during the first six months or so pose a threat to the integrity
or independence of the Yugoslav state. It will, however, reduce the
regime’s ability to manage domestic and foreign challenges, which are
likely to be more severe in the post-Tito period than they have been
in the 1970s. Moreover, the high degree of internal political solidarity
that will probably characterize the immediate post-Tito succession is
unlikely to persist. In consequence, the country will enter a period,
probably prolonged, of great uncertainty and potential instability.
4. The range of plausible contingencies that will shape and reshape
the sequence of events is very large and includes the distinct possibility
that Yugoslavia will not weather the 1980s with its integrity and inde-
pendence intact. Of crucial importance is the interplay among a number
of central variables, of which the most critical will be the nature of
Soviet initiatives and reactions, the efficacy of Western assistance, and,
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski
Office File, Country Chron File, Box 86, Yugoslavia: 1–12/79. Secret; [handling restriction
not declassified]. Carter wrote on the cover: “The main unanswered question is: through
what means the Soviets can present such a threat to Yugoslavia. J.” Attached but not
printed is volume II, “The Annexes,” which discuss specific Yugoslav political, economic,
and military aspects. The text is available in Yugoslavia: From “National Communism” to
National Collapse, p. 579 and following.
