322
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
them further and get into details during his meeting with Saunders on
Oct 19.5 He welcomed, however, Saunders’ offer to outline US thinking
and philosophical approach which had resulted in Camp David Agree-
ments. King made point of restating his familiar position on Jerusalem
and questioned Saunders closely on status of US disagreement with Is-
rael on West Bank settlements issue.
3. Following introductory remarks by Saunders, King who had
clearly been briefed by Sharaf, replied that he considers that the US and
Jordan are engaged in a very constructive dialogue which Jordan hopes
to pursue. He observed that the US and Jordan have similar objectives
but appear to be working at the problem from different directions. Half
joking, he suggested that the US has attempted to avoid making the
framework as tight as it might be. In a later remark, which is probably
indicative of the strategy he will pursue at least until after the projected
Baghdad summit, Hussein said he would continue for a period of time
to pester us with questions which he jokingly said the US “will con-
tinue to try to evade.”
4. Hussein said, in a more serious vein, that Jordan needs some-
thing in hand to assure it that there has been no erosion of the US posi-
tion on the shape of a final settlement. Decrying the fact that Jordan has
no external guarantor, he said he wished that he had a commitment
from the US similar in fact, if not in depth of sentiment, to that enjoyed
by Israel. Jordan, he emphasized, is being asked to enter into the frame-
work negotiated at Camp David from a position of great weakness. The
results of Camp David, he stated, had come as a complete surprise to
Jordan. Nevertheless, he said he had been seriously considering what
Jordan might do to bring about a starting point for further progress.
Scattered throughout his discourse were references to his unhappiness
at what he perceives as Egyptian strategy and, at one point, he stressed
that Egypt must realize that it is not the “shepherd” with Jordan and
other Arabs playing the roles of the “flock”. Hussein also felt obvious
discomfort with the Saudi role which he felt put Jordan on the line
without quote anything in terms of meaningful support. End quote.
King also repeatedly stressed with bitterness continuing Saudi support
for the PLO.
5 Saunders again met with Hussein at Hashemiya Palace in Amman, following the
former’s return from Jidda, on October 19. Following the ninety minute meeting, during
which Saunders’s trip to Saudi Arabia, the upcoming summit of Arab leaders in
Baghdad, and Hussein’s continued study of the U.S. responses to his questions were dis-
cussed, Saunders concluded: “In short, King Hussein is not yet prepared to join Camp
David framework negotiations on West Bank/Gaza himself—at least not before Arab
summit—but he is prepared to encourage West Bankers to participate in Egyptian dele-
gation and to discuss mechanics of Egyptian recruitment efforts with Egyptians. (Tele-
gram 8137 from Amman, October 20; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
File, P850101–1868)
