268 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement 205. Telegram 745 from Geneva1 Geneva, September 20, 1955, 3 p.m. 745. From Johnson. 1. At today’s meeting two hours ten minutes, apparently on theory best defense is offensive, Wang opened with statement accusing me of violating understanding on private nature talks reaffirming desire to keep talks private. 2. I replied with statement explaining my misunderstanding his intention at last meeting, pointing out his statement disclosed substance his remarks therefore required me make public substance our position. Regretted his statement yesterday, noted I had made no response and hoped “I will not have to do so”. Glad he agreed meetings should con­ tinue to be private. This followed by some give and take on whose fault but reaffirmation of agreement on private nature talks. 3. I then made reply his letter along lines paragraph 5 my 740 adding only Indian Ambassador today discussing with Department responsibilities being assumed. 4. There was then long give and take with Wang on one hand trying twist my remarks into statement we had “invited” UK and “agreed” to PRC invitation to GOI. I expressed surprise Wang’s effort make issue out of this, pointed out clear language agreed announcement, and emphasized substance of situation, that is, US had immediately taken all action implement agreed announcement with respect to third coun­ tries, India now able function in US, UK apparently still not able func­ tion in PRC. Said it was imperative they take with UK action similar that US had taken with GOI. Wang said PRC had extended “invita­ tion” to GOI and Nehru had announced in Parliament its acceptance. Towards end I pressed hard for statement PRC would contact UK Charge Peiping and do necessary permit UK immediately start func­ tioning. After unsuccessfully pressing me hard to say we had “invited” UK in accordance with announcement he apparently chose to accept my statement that we had informed UK and requested it undertake functions and while avoiding direct reply my insistence that PRC con­ tact UK Charge, appeared to indicate they would do necessary permit UK function. 5. I then made statement on publicity agreed announcement Chi­ nese press in US and referred to unanswered questions I had asked him 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/9–2055. Confidential; Niact; Limited Distribution.
