Covert and Overt Operations
893
hostages in Iran was tasked to the undersigned by competent civil
authority on 26 April, 1980. In order to provide the best chance of
securing operational security, a cover operation involving DRE was
approved on 23 May 80 and briefed to JCS on 3 June. Training and
preparation for SNOWBIRD was placed under the cover operations,
HONEY BADGER and ICE BOX. Since definitive intelligence has not
been available, it was necessary for the Joint Task Force to design a
number of possible options and train a wide spectrum of forces. To
date, these forces include 2,477 personnel and 136 various aircraft. Most
of these forces were incorporated into a July 80 training program that
was briefed to the Service OPSDEPS on 2 July. This document recapitu-
lates the major training events, lessons learned, costs and future needs
to provide a reasonable assurance of future SNOWBIRD success. The
HONEY BADGER exercises incorporated many of the training and
validation tasks that had to be accomplished to prepare the Joint Task
Force to execute SNOWBIRD Options One through Eight.2 ICE BOX
activity was to evaluate the feasibility of Option Nine.3 Before and
during the July training, a number of increased aviation and communi-
cations capabilities were attained, a number of techniques were devel-
oped and a number of force deficiencies identified. These deficiencies
are incorporated into the overall future training program. An addi-
tional, separate activity was the coordination and planning for Option
VII and VIII, the use of commercial or USN ships as launch platforms.
Finally, this document includes conclusions and recommendations con-
cerning future actions for SNOWBIRD and Special Operations in
general.
[Omitted here is a description of Honey Badger and Ice Box, with
projected costs.]
9. (TS) Conclusions: (See Inclosure 14). Due to the lack of definitive
intelligence, approval for the use of launch bases, the absence of an
existing means to infiltrate the release force and the lack of total force
proficiency, it is not possible to execute the SNOWBIRD mission at
2 Explained in enclosure 1, “HB Training Tasks.”
3 Option IX envisioned “the clandestine penetration of hostile airspace, the surprise,
night-time, air-landed seizure of an airfield, the landing of an extraction force composed
of light helicopters, hostage evacuation and finally, force extraction. The concept was
first conceived by the Joint Task Force Commander in June” and focused on acquiring
and training an LOH (light observation helicopter) unit.
