We have been urged to accept this as the minimum of agreement, but I fail
to see that such a minimum would have beneficial results, and indeed, I
believe it might have quite the contrary. To state to our various
Governments that we have achieved so low a minimum of agreement is a
very easy thing; indeed, we might record agreement merely on the principle
that we were agreed to disagree.
It is the profound conviction of my Government that our purpose in this
work is to make such contribution as we can to the cause of peace. The
cause of peace is not served by offering merely a further cause of
bewilderment between the States, a further cause of speculation, a further
cause perhaps of distrust; it can be furnished by the elimination of doubt
following on full publication which provides an accurate knowledge of the
facts all over the world.
We have discussed the achievement of publicity by means of three factors:
value, weight and numbers. It was clearly brought out in the Sub-
Committee that the choice of value as the only means is the choice of the
most elastic, the least definite, the least exact of these measures. It is a true
minimum, and I fail to see how any lower minimum could have been
suggested.
During the course of the debates we have endeavoured to give to the best of
our ability the most complete reasons for our attitude concerning complete
publicity, and we have consistently endeavoured to understand why certain
of the delegations have failed to agree to a full measure of publicity. We
have repeatedly asked for explanations and, speaking for myself, and I
believe for a considerable number of our members, I cannot find that any
adequate attempt has been made to convince us of this necessity; indeed, as
I stated yesterday, I should be very reluctant to have to explain to my
Government the reason for this attitude on the part of some of the
delegations. I should have frankly to say that I do not know.
I realise that we are representatives of our Governments and that we are all
bound by more or less detailed instructions. I realise that we cannot hope
here and now to change the opinions which have been expressed; indeed, I
have nothing but gratitude for the loyalty and clarity with which the
members have expressed their views. Nevertheless, I take this opportunity
