Comprehensive Test Ban
583
Delegation strongly opposed “Zero NSS”, which would imply UK
withdrawal from the SVA, arguing that this would be unacceptable to
the Soviet Union and damaging to British prestige. From contacts with
the British here and in London, I have the impression that the new UK
Government has some basic reservations regarding the value of a CTB
treaty. For example, Minister of State Douglas Hurd referred in a con-
versation with me to a low-threshold treaty as a hypothetical possible
substitute for a CTB. He also asked why Britain should play the Soviet
“Numbers Game” and whether it would not be in the UK interest,
though not necessarily in US interest, for the UK to withdraw from the
negotiations altogether. These reservations about the value of the CTB
may help explain why the UK Government has been so slow in reach-
ing a decision on NSS.
8. The Soviet role and attitude. Throughout the round the Soviets
continued to wait for a UK response to their proposal for ten NSS on
UK territory. They repeatedly made it clear that they had no interest in
NSS within the British Isles, and that the withdrawal of the UK from the
NSS arrangements would be unacceptable. Finally, they continued to
refuse to discuss any other NSS issues before the question of the
number and location of UK NSS was settled. At the opening of the
round, the Soviets hinted at some flexibility regarding the number of
UK NSS they could accept, conveying the impression that they might
settle for fewer NSS in UK territory than the ten proposed for the USSR.
By the end of the round, however, the Soviets were again saying that,
whatever number of NSS there were in UK dependent territories, the
USSR would accept the same number in the Soviet Union. The Soviets
may have hoped that their apparent show of flexibility would elicit an
early UK answer, to which they could reply by reaffirming their re-
quirement of equal numbers. The Soviets may in fact have in mind
using whatever number the UK comes up with as a basis for driving the
US toward a lower number of NSS in the USSR, at least during the first
three years. On several occasions Petrosyants and Timerbaev infor-
mally raised the possibility of adjusting the phasing of the installation
of the NSS, in effect of agreeing to install a small number of NSS (or
none) during the first duration of the treaty with a commitment to in-
stall more if the treaty is renewed.
9. During this round, in contrast with the last, the Soviets in in-
formal discussions avoided any suggestion that they will be ready to
begin serious negotiations on other NSS issues as soon as the UK issue
is settled. This may be because, as I have just indicated, the Soviets have
in mind using the number proposed by the UK as a basis for proposing
a reduction in the number of NSS in the USSR, possibly linking this to
an adjustment in the phasing of installation. They may expect a pro-
longed debate over these issues and for this reason no longer expect to
