500
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
be prepared to discuss this in more definite terms as the negotiations
progress.
Prime Minister Begin: Thank you very much, Mr. President. Now,
Mr. President, I only want to say that there shouldn’t be any doubt in
your mind or with President Sadat that we want to implement the au-
tonomy. The two delegations must meet and reach an agreement on the
autonomy. It will take some time. As it happened yesterday, four
people were killed. The PLO is around. You will not wish and Presi-
dent Sadat will not want it, if the PLO should take over. We are in com-
plete agreement. There will be two delegations. Then when we have the
agreement, then there is the question of the elections, and it will not
present any difficulty. Then the people wish either to elect or to be
elected. Therefore, this is the reason why we took that decision. Indeed,
on a timetable we cannot accept. What we want to do is to start the ne-
gotiations quickly, a few weeks after the signing. I think it is very rea-
sonable. It is absolutely appropriate to take the first draft written by
Ambassador Atherton on your behalf, Mr. President.9 This [is] the
whole difference now. I hope it is reasonable, because this is an objec-
tive situation. We have the PLO with their submachine guns. We have
made great progress. We want peace and the peace treaty, so let us sign
the text.
President Carter: Mr. Prime Minister, let me ask you if you are op-
posed to agreeing that the negotiations themselves would start within a
month?
Prime Minister Begin: No, we are not opposed to it.
President Carter: Let me ask you a key question. This is the key
question in President Sadat’s mind. If we do not establish a definite
date for the elections and autonomous government in the West Bank,
would you be willing to delay the interim withdrawal without any date
being specified until those elections can be held? If the peace treaty is
signed without delay, and if Israel has access to the Suez Canal, and so
forth, as is intended in the treaty agreements?
Prime Minister Begin: I must admit, Mr. President, that I would hes-
itate to state my point of view. I need to consult with my colleagues.
President Carter: This is just a possibility for resolving the differ-
ence and I am not trying to speak for President Sadat. I am not trying to
speak officially on that.
Prime Minister Begin: If the interim withdrawal does not start and is
not completed, we don’t have the normal relations. I understand that as
we are now that the peace treaty would only be signed and ratified.
9 Reference is to the initial negotiating draft of the treaty presented at the beginning
of the Blair House talks. See footnote 2, Document 83.
