Colombia 335 the loyalty of the armed forces was questionable. The Junta was convinced that the armed forces were loyal but then they had been similarly convinced before May 2nd. The Foreign Minister then got out a series of telegrams, apparently most or all of which originated in the Colombian Embassy at Cuidad Trujillo.5 According to these telegrams General Trujillo had suggested to the Panamanian Military Attaché (Aued?) that he organize a coup against the present Panamanian Government. Another message reported that Peron planned in conjunction with opposition elements in southern Brazil to go to southern Brazil or possibly Paraguay with the eventual purpose of re-­entering Argentina and overthrowing the Government there. The Foreign Minister thought that communists might be included among these opposition elements. I asked whether Peron was supposed already to be in southern Brazil and the Foreign Minister said he did not know from the telegram. With regard to Samuel Moreno Diaz, Rojas Pinilla’s son-­in-­law, he had arrived in Cuidad Trujillo. He had been met at the airport by protocol officers and taken to the Hotel Paz, which was a second-­class hotel owned by the Government. There he had received many telephone calls. The Foreign Minister then said [text not declassified] that there had been a great deal of arms smuggling recently to furnish weapons to dissident elements in various parts of the country. He said that he had looked into it, and was convinced that the actual smuggling was purely commercial but that didn’t alter the fact than the arms were getting into the hands of disgruntled elements. I said that we, too, had reports of arms smuggling, particularly from Panama, and that we had been looking into this matter to see if there were anything we could do to cooperate in stopping it. He said that they also knew that arms were coming in from Panama. The Foreign Minister then said that he thought it would be an effective discouragement to any military men who were considering a coup if we should announce that we were sending a special mission to the Lleras inauguration. In making the announcement, he suggested that we underscore that we were sending the mission in order to express our great satisfaction at the return of Colombia to democratic government, and say anything else which would indicate that we would take it decidedly amiss if Colombia were not returned to democratic government. I said that the idea of a statement seemed to me a good one. On previous occasions I had indicated to key military men that in the event of a military coup Colombia could expect no further help from the United States. He enthusiastically agreed that this was a wise move on my part since American aid was obviously essential to Colombia 5 The referenced telegrams were not further identified.
