804  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
188.	 Minutes of Cabinet Meeting1
Washington, July 31, 1959, 9–10:40 a.m.
The following were present:
President Eisenhower
1 Source: Civil defense exercise and planning. Confidential. Extracts—4 pp. 
Eisenhower Library, White House Office Files, Cabinet Secretariat.
Mr. C. Douglas Dillon for Sec. Herter
Sec. Anderson
Mr. Thomas S. Gates for Sec. McElroy
AG Rogers
Mr. Edson O. Sessions for PMG 
Summerfield
Mr. Fred Aandahl for Sec. Seaton
Sec. Mueller
Sec. Benson
Sec. Mitchell
Sec. Flemming
Director Stans
Gov. Hoegh
Mr. John F. Floberg, AEC
Dr. Raymond J. Saulnier, CEA
Dr. Arthur Maxwell, Navy
Dr. James H. Wakelin, Navy
Gen. Goodpaster
Mr. Robert Gray
Mr. Gordon Gray
Mr. Harr
Mr. Kendall
Dr. Kistiakowsky
Mr. Morgan
Dr. Pearlberg
Maj Eisenhower
Mr. Stephens—(in part)
Capt Aurand—(in part)
Mr. Patterson
[Omitted here is the beginning of the minutes.]
Phase IV of OPERATION ALERT, 1959—Gov. Hoegh noted that the 
President’s original suggestion for this fourth phase was for a 10-day 
“buttoned-­up” period in October. Because many of the relocation sites 
are on college campuses—which would be active in October—and 
because of the cost involved, Governor Hoegh recommended an alter­
nate procedure. Since, except for its final communications, the new 
underground facility at High Point will be completed by October, Gov. 
Hoegh’s proposal is that there be a 2-­day “familiarization test” of that 
facility by members of the Cabinet, other agency heads, and some 650 of 
the 2750 personnel for whom High Point is their emergency duty station.
The President approved the proposal of the Director of the Office 
of Civil and Defense Mobilization for Phase IV of OPERATION ALERT, 
1959 as follows: (a) A familiarization test of the protected facility 
at High Point from 10:30 A.M, October 19, to 4:00 P.M., October 20; 
(b) Participation by heads of departments and major agencies plus 25 
per cent of the agencies’ emergency staffs designated to operate from 
High Point (of column three of Attachment B to approved Cabinet
