January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981 1205 Secretary Vance said that to accelerate progress in the talks, we need to deal with security problems promptly. This is important from the standpoint of general expedition. Prime Minister Begin said that they would start on the maps now. It would take 10 days to two weeks to complete them. Minister Burg said that there are no Egyptians here to speak for themselves. Why is this the crux of the matter? First there can be meetings (Note: accent on the plural), with security taken up, then the advisory committees can be set up. The President said that this was fair enough. Prime Minister Begin asked whether Minister Burg is suggesting this. Then it is his (Minister Burg’s) suggestion! Minister Burg said that Begin is the Prime Minister! Prime Minister Begin said that, after Ambassador Linowitz’s comment, he (Prime Minister Begin) had no option but to accept! Ambassador Linowitz said he was glad he had found the right formula! Minister Burg said: “advisory teams.” (Prime Minister Begin then read the redrafted statement on the Continuing Committee). He said that Professor Ruth wants the word “may” instead of “will” (on issues to be dealt with by the committee). Is this in Camp David? Professor Lapidot said that it is, if we stick with Camp David. Minister Burg said as with the 26th of “May.” The President accepted the word “may.” Prime Minister Begin agreed. (See Attachment II)8 The President said that if this flexibility continues, there will be no other matters! Prime Minister Begin said that this is very good. The President agreed it was very good (i.e. the agreement on the Continuing Committee). Next is the problem of alternatives to the electoral process. Prime Minister Begin said he had told his friends of the President’s two proposals.9 (He then conferred with his colleagues, who nodded agreement). This is a very serious issue. The President agreed. Prime Minister Begin said that the soul of the Camp David Accords on the Administrative Council is elections. There should be no misun- 8 A mistaken reference to Attachment I. (See footnote 7 above) 9 See Document 358.
