552 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV to restructure some of the selected attack options that were defined several years ago. (S) He noted that DOD is now developing a launch under attack option. He said that 71 percent of the Minuteman force is now targeted against low collateral damage military targets in the SIOP, but that we currently have no way to withhold the remaining 29 percent. (S) He said that DOD is looking at limited nuclear option attacks to damage and disrupt Soviet forces on the Chinese frontier. He noted that DOD is also developing plans to substitute regional nuclear options for SIOP attacks on China. (TS) He commented on efforts being made to improve the targeting data base. He cited efforts being made to improve the crisis management process, in particular by structuring exercises that would include senior officials in planning non-SIOP options. He noted that several efforts are underway to improve our C3 capabilities. He said that first priority must go to achieving improved survivability for our C3 in the initial stages of a war and, after we have achieved this, we should pursue measures to improve long-­term endurance of both C3 and forces. He noted that both the Air Force and the Navy are carrying out studies on connectivity of their C3 networks. Finally, he noted that DOD is constructing some additional nuclear options against Soviet conventional forces in Eastern Europe. He raised the question of how we might go about telling our NATO Allies about these efforts. (TS) Dr. Brzezinski commented that this was a long list of efforts and that it, along with the other issues in the study, constituted a very long list of items for the group to discuss. He suggested that we should structure the discussion by framing the major issues as follows: (1) what are the requirements of stable deterrence at different levels? (2) what are the requirements of stable crisis bargaining? and (3) what are the requirements of effective war management? He noted that we must move beyond planning for nuclear force employment as if all the forces would be employed in a single spasmodic attack. (TS) Secretary Brown agreed with this last point, but said that it is impor­ tant to have our planning for all out nuclear war well in hand because an all out spasm war is the most likely possibility, given the unlikely possibility of nuclear war in the first place. (TS) Dr. Brzezinski responded by noting that the very likelihood of all out nuclear war is increased if all out spasm war is the only kind of nuclear war we can fight. He then asked Secretary Vance if the three questions he had posed constituted a reasonable framework for further discussion. (S) Secretary Vance responded by noting that the first question was fine, but asked what was meant by the second. (U)
