1978 357 —Can the air command post do more than manage SIOP-­type options? How will its intelligence and force connectivity be kept up to date in the weeks and months after a war begins? —Where will surviving SAC bombers go after the initial strikes? —If public electrical power is lost, can the ICBM force still launch? How long can it endure without public electrical power? II. Planning and Targeting As the PD–18 targeting study indicates, our major planning effort has been on the SIOP and its MAO and SAO variants. The SIOP is no small achievement, but its great complexity also introduces rigidities. As you recall from IVORY ITEMS, once there was a search for refinements to adjust a retaliatory response to various and different situations, the rigidity became apparent—­e.g., recalling the bombers after a couple of hours. That is still virtually undoable without calling off every other part of the SIOP. Another problem lies in the integration of our strategic forces with SACEUR’s theater nuclear forces. The same problem also exists in Korea although it does not get the same attention. Here is the problem as I understand it. If SACEUR shoots his “general strike plan” (TNF) in conjunction with the SIOP, things are all right. If they are fired separately, great gaps occur. The most troublesome aspect of this seems to be the possibility of escalation in Europe which we want to hold at the theater level. There are differing views on the adequacy of our present planning of nuclear fires for that event. LNO’s and RNO’s are the planning devices which are meant to move us away from the SIOP rigidity. The ones now planned are largely academic exercises because circumstances, military and political, will never be exactly as assumed in the planning phase. The direction to move with LNO’s is toward more speed in planning them for particular situations as they arise. You should try to get a good sense for SAC’s lack of flexibility and speed in such planning. SAC and the Air Force like to evade this issue because it shows so clearly how they are unprepared for anything but the big spastic retaliation.2 You will want to ask about “secure reserve force” (SRF) planning.3 This topic, like LNO’s, brings up the question of how long a war will last and how to endure for the long campaign. SAC is very weak on this matter. The planners don’t know what they would target with the SRF, and they are not sure how they will control them. SRF is also a bone of inter-­service contention. The Navy likes to use SRF for justifying more 2 Brzezinski drew two vertical lines in the left margin next to this and the previous sentence. 3 Brzezinski drew a vertical line in the left margin next to this sentence.
