892
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
of Egypt’s military equipment needs, but not all. Egypt should be en-
couraged to develop perhaps smaller but nevertheless significant
supply programs with Europeans and others to complement our own
activities.
In carrying out this policy, we need to begin conditioning both
Congress and the public to the fact that Egypt has legitimate defense re-
quirements in addition to needs for support in its economic develop-
ment program and that both of these aspects of our effort serve U.S. na-
tional interests and are closely intertwined.
In our judgment, U.S.-Egyptian defense relationships are devel-
oping in productive ways, although the supply of equipment is natu-
rally not as extensive, as inexpensive, or as fast as Egypt desires.
—We will deliver before October 6 the first of the F–4 aircraft, plus
other equipment and, if Egypt makes a firm decision, a Gearing Class
destroyer. These first deliveries are a high priority for Sadat and we
have made every effort to make them available in time for this polit-
ically important date.
—We are exchanging a number of expert military teams on
Egypt’s high priority items, such as air defense.
—We have defined with Egypt the equipment priorities and de-
livery schedules for the full $1.5 billion already agreed.
—We are starting work on the longer term plan decided above.
While this will not initially provide commitments for financing and de-
livery, it will continue the military dialogue and help to cement defense
relationships between our two countries.
In addition we earlier promised Sadat and Kamal Ali that we
would welcome the opportunity for close defense consultations. To
that end we would expect to have annual meetings at the Defense Min-
ister level and periodic staff consultations during the year.
We believe we are well started on the road to enhanced defense re-
lationships with Egypt. We will have to consult closely with Congres-
sional leaders as we go along.
Cyrus Vance
Harold Brown
