1955 601 aliens entering country. This normal requirement by consular officers issuing visas and has been done as long as I can remember. When per­ son in country under temporary status desires extend period of stay, he must show this still holds good. 59. I said this arose regularly in regard to Chinese admitted tem­ porarily as it does in regard any other nationality. Requirement can be satisfied in number of ways. Does not change fact when alien desires depart he free to do so and go any place of his choice. This need not be place he indicated at time of application. We do not control destination of aliens. They free depart any time for any destination of their choice. 60. I said Wang had spoken of his government making statement on September 10 announcement. It was not clear whether he referring to his statement here this morning or to public statement. I hoped it would not be latter. I was willing see facts made public, as I was sure facts would speak for themselves, but I did not see how it would help progress talks to engage in public propaganda. Such course would cer­ tainly entangle discussions. 61. I said I was sure he had noted that in spite of great public con­ cern in U.S. over subject, statements by Secretary of State restrained in tone and confined to expression expectation announcement will be fully implemented. Secretary thus attempting discourage public debate. I thought he had been quite successful in this effort. 62. I said I had talked privately and frankly with Wang about sub­ ject. I had carefully and honestly answered all questions he had raised, and frankly given views of my government. I failed to see how bringing all this into public propaganda debate could contribute to progress. 63. Wang replied that he was very disappointed and wished express regret that discussion last meeting and again today had gone beyond item two of agenda. PRC side has no intent or desire go back to dis­ putes and discussion that took place before issuance of September 10 agreement. It was because I had engaged discussion item one, PRC side forced do same. 64. Wang said his side always rejected any accusations by myself or by U.S. officials alleging his side violating agreement on return civil­ ians. It has been position PRC side all along that either we would not reach agreement or, if agreement reached, it would be faithfully carried out so far as PRC side concerned. PRC has not altered this position. It can be seen PRC side is exactly performing agreement. From figures I had produced this morning, cannot be denied majority of Americans including those who committed offenses have departed. 65. Wang said we had had long argument over handling of group of Americans who breached law in China. PRC side did not enter into agreement that this group would be released by given date. This very clear. As he had indicated before, two factors will count concerning
