National Security Policy 987 Assistants to the President for National Security Affairs, and Science and Technology; the White House Staff Secretary; Assistant Secretary of State Gerard C. Smith; Assistant Secretary of Defense John N. Irwin, II; the Executive Secretary, NSC; the Deputy Executive Secretary, NSC; and Mr. Charles Haskins, NSC.2 There follows a summary of the discussion at the meeting and the main points taken. [Omitted here are pages 2–11.] 2. SIGNIFICANT WORLD DEVELOPMENTS AFFECTING U.S. SECURITY [Omitted here are pages 12–13.] Mr. Dulles felt the Soviets would want to make a good deal of the two kilometers CEP which they say they have achieved. He thought it was possible that the Soviets intended to support their position in forthcoming diplomatic negotiations by a dramatic demonstration of the long range of their missiles. General White, on the contrary, believed that when the Soviets want to achieve maximum diplomatic impact, they will name the time and the target which they wish to hit, and will attempt to put the missile on the target. Dr. Kistiakowsky pointed out that the 24 hour postponement in the launching of the Soviet missile suggested that the Soviets had fired something new rather than an old-­ type missile. Mr. Dulles said he was about to appear before a Congressional Committee and predicted that he would be asked about the Soviet firing. The President said that Mr. Dulles could tell the Committee that the Soviet missile had fallen in the impact area and that it had been seen by our observers in the area. The Attorney General felt Mr. Dulles should emphasize that there is no assurance that the Soviet report of the missile CEP is accurate. Mr. Allen said we should per­ haps indicate that since our CEP is two miles, we assume Russian accuracy is about the same. The President felt, on the other hand, that we should give no credence to the announced Russian CEP until the Russians predict the exact spot they intend to hit and allow us to observe the firing. Mr. McCone asked whether there would be other Soviet missile fir­ ings in the Pacific. Mr. Dulles said he assumed the firing just described was one in a series of shots. The President said that in Congressional testimony it could be said by US officials that the Soviet missile had impacted in the impact 2 [text not declassified]
