776
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
244.
Memorandum of Conversation1
Washington, September 30, 1977, 10:40–11:25 a.m.
SUBJECT
Summary of the President’s Meeting with Edvard Kardelj, Member of the
Presidency of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
PARTICIPANTS
The President
The Vice President
Warren Christopher, Acting Secretary of State
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
Lawrence Eagleburger, US Ambassador to Yugoslavia
William H. Luers, Deputy Assistant Secretary for European Affairs
Gregory F. Treverton, NSC Staff member [Notetaker]2
Edvard Kardelj, Member of the Presidency of the Socialist Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia
Dimce Belovski, Yugoslav Ambassador to the United States
Emil Ludviger, Member of the Federal Executive Council and Federal Secretary
for Foreign Trade
Dragan Bernardic, Assistant Federal Secretary for Foreign Affairs
Svetozar Starcevic, Director of the Political Department, Federal Secretary for
Foreign Affairs
Borislav Lazarevic, Chef de Cabinet for Mr. Kardelj
Radivoje Petkovic, Minister-Counselor, Yugoslav Embassy
Vladimir Matic, Political Counselor, Yugoslav Embassy
Branka Jojic, Interpreter
Mr. Kardelj opened the meeting by thanking the President for his
invitation and for taking the time for the meeting. He handed the
President the original of a letter from President Tito, indicating that
the President had already been informed of the letter’s contents. The
President said he read the letter that morning. He was honored to have
Kardelj in Washington. He said that he and his colleagues had been
reviewing Kardelj’s book, and he congratulated him on his role as a
statesman and author. Kardelj said he was not sure he deserved the
compliments; he and others in Yugoslavia had done what they had to.
The President expressed gratitude for the reception given to the
Vice President in Yugoslavia, saying that it and this visit confirmed
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
Box 35, Memcons: President: 9/19–30/77. Secret; Sensitive. Drafted by Treverton. While
the White House memorandum of conversation notes that the meeting took place in the
Oval Office, a Department of State memorandum of the conversation drafted by Luers
places the meeting in the Cabinet Room. (Ibid.)
2 All brackets are in the original.
