286
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
79.
Report Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1
Washington, undated
SUBJECT
Comments of King Husayn on his Perception Of U.S. Pressure on Jordan to Join
the Middle East Peace Negotiations and on his Recent Discussions with Saudi
and Gulf Leaders
1. In King Husayn’s contacts with the United States, and in partic-
ular in three letters2 and one telephone call3 he has received from Presi-
dent Carter, Husayn has discerned the following theme: entering the
negotiations is a difficult and risky course, but the King has taken risks
in the past; furthermore, not getting involved holds far more risks.
These and other messages—indicating that if Jordan “falls into line” its
military and economic needs will be satisfied—add up in the King’s
mind to an implied threat. (Comment: In a separate conversation, Jor-
dan Armed Forces Commander in Chief Lt. Gen. Bin Shakir stated that
during his June 1978 visit to the U.S. he was told by a U.S. Presidential
Advisor that Jordan had been too “passive” about getting into the
peace process.) At one point, Husayn noted that he will never reach the
level of importance that Israel has in U.S. eyes, and that he can never
turn to the Soviets. He said, “I may go down.”
2. Very evident throughout the conversation was Husayn’s frus-
tration with the Saudis. He described Crown Prince Fahd as indecisive
and ineffective while having all the power in the world at his disposal.
He urged Fahd that they set up a committee of two to discuss “alterna-
tives”, as time was running out. Fahd agreed in principle; when Hu-
sayn asked when they could meet for a follow-up, Fahd said he would
have to check first with King Khalid. This apparently exasperated King
Husayn, who figured that getting Khalid’s clearance could take weeks.
In Saudi Arabia, Husayn observed, nothing gets done right and
nothing gets done on time. (Comment: Though Husayn did not men-
tion Saudi aid to Jordan, we can probably safely assume that he got no
definitive answer from Fahd on this score either.)
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,
Job 80M01542R: Executive Registry Subject Files (1978), Box 7, Folder 3, J–3: Jordan. Se-
cret; Sensitive. The report was forwarded under an October 7 covering memorandum
from Turner to Vance, which indicated that the information in the report was also pro-
vided to Brzezinski and Veliotes. In the memorandum, Turner stated that [text not declas-
sified] had not seen Hussein in “such an apocalyptic mood since the evening following the
Rabat Summit Decision.” (Ibid.)
2 See footnote 1, Document 11 and Document 61.
3 See Document 58.
