Arms Control and Disarmament  1341
General Gruenther commented that the recent United Nations 
Security Council meeting was a defeat for the Soviet Union. Mr. Dulles 
said that we handled the meeting well, but that the Soviet Union cer­
tainly had expected the result. They took this step as the kick-­off of an 
intensive propaganda campaign. Khrushchev has referred since to the 
danger of American bombers in his latest letter. Now the satellite gov­
ernments are sending protest notes.
Mr. Dulles said that it appeared the right course of action would 
be for the United States to take action now on the nuclear test matter—
perhaps by announcing readiness to stop nuclear tests for 12, 18 or 24 
months. We would resume testing if an effective inspection system was 
not operating by the end of the period. He asked the reactions of the 
advisors.
Mr. Lovett said that he would favor this move if it would reduce 
the prospects of a summit meeting. Mr. McCloy agreed; he felt that in 
this way we could avoid jeopardizing our position on Central Europe 
at a summit meeting. General Gruenther expressed concern at the 
unilateral element. It would be hard for us to resume testing once we 
stopped, and accordingly the precise way in which the announcement 
was put would be very important. Mr. Dulles said that of course the 
United Kingdom would have to join in such a statement. As for the 
manner of putting it there could be a call for several stages: an initial 
agreement on an inspected suspension, a check point after a year on 
progress in installing the inspection system, and then the full opera­
tion of the inspection system. General Gruenther said that this kind of 
approach would meet his concern.
General Smith said that he favored such a move, but thought that 
we should not delude ourselves that the Soviet Union will accept ade­
quate inspection. Admiral Strauss said that he foresaw that we will 
gradually be whittled down from 70 stations to 50 stations then 25, 
10 and perhaps less. Mr. McCloy said that he thought even 10 stations 
would be worthwhile in view of the political gain of Soviet acceptance 
of inspection.
Mr. Dulles thanked the advisors for joining him and giving him the 
benefit of their counsel.
