Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII want to fight; the new United Front will hold together as long as money and arms are denied to its constituent parts; all that is needed are weapons. Azzam asked that this message be passed to Washington for urgent consideration, implying that he would be the obvious channel for communication between the USG and the Front. 8. EmbOff thanked Azzam for his views but emphasized that any consideration which the Western alliance might give to his suggestion would be complicated by obvious factors, not the least of them being the attitude of the Pakistan Government. Azzam said he had been assured by senior officials in the GOP (he said he had talked to Zia, but did not say he spoke to him on this subject) that Pakistan would welcome arms shipments for the Afghans although Zia would, of course, continue to deny in public that any arms had in fact been delivered. EmbOff reiterated that while we appreciate Azzam’s efforts to offer us useful advice, the USG was not in the business of clandestine arms supply. EmbOff did, however, promise to convey Azzam’s views to Washington. 9. Comment: Azzam is believed in London to have a Muslim Brotherhood background and the money for his Islamic Council is said to come from his relation by marriage to Muhammed bin Faysal.3 He has in the last year sponsored several expensive conferences in London on Islamic issues (from which the Egyptian Embassy has routinely been excluded) ranging from the recent Jerusalem seminar to an early 1979 effort on behalf of Khomeini. We think he is an ambitious man who reflects Saudi foreign policy concerns—thus he is stridently anti-Camp David and was quick to denounce the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan in public and in letters to Mrs. Thatcher and President Carter.4 We are obviously unable to judge what if any links he has developed with the various Afghan groups, but judging by his derogatory comments about Gailani, he does not enjoy a good relationship with the latter. Our guess is that Azzam knows he will gain important points with SAG if he can attain U.S. assistance for the new Afghan Front and he will hope for some kind of answer to his presentation to us. 10. Suggest Department repeat to Jidda and to Islamabad and Peshawar. Streator 3 An apparent reference to the Saudi Prince. 4 Not found.
