Human Rights
351
lowing the Communist coup attempt in 1965. Approximately 20,000
more remain in detention camps. Officials plan to release 10,000 in
1978, and the remainder by the end of 1979. There is no evidence from
any source to support Amnesty International’s allegation that upwards
of2 90,000 political prisoners still remain in detention.
Thailand. The assumption of power by the Kriangsak government
on November 11 brought an end to press censorship, a more relaxed at-
titude toward political opposition, and introduced a period of more
open internal political dialogue. The new government, demonstrating
increasing sensitivity to international human rights pressures, also per-
mitted legal counsel for the 18 students now on trial for their activities
at the time of the Thammasat University riots in late 1976. Approxi-
mately 3,000 other students arrested at the time have been released.
Philippines. Although President Marcos frequently gave lip service
to his government’s concern for the rights of the individual, there was
little or no progress in the human rights area during 1977. Marcos con-
tinues to exercise highly centralized control over the political life of the
country through his use of martial law powers. Occasional reports of
torture by security personnel continue to be received, and political op-
position sources allege that few if any of the 1,000 detainees released
during the summer were political dissidents. Marcos’ main political
opponent, Senator Aquino, is still in prison awaiting a reopening of his
trial, despite the fact that a military tribunal had earlier sentenced him
to death for treason.3
Africa
The main human rights preoccupation of all African countries in
1977 was the intensification of repression in South Africa, which was
dominated by the major crackdown on black political activity there on
October 19.4 There is no evidence that any of those who were arrested
at that time have been released. Despite condemnation of Africa’s racist
policies throughout the world, furthermore, prospects for any signifi-
cant improvement in the overall situation are dim, at best.
Many African leaders regard human rights as an essentially
Western political concept which does not reflect the needs and realities
2 An unknown hand changed “upwards” to “up to.”
3 An unknown hand deleted the word “treason” and added “murder and
subversion.”
4 The NSC Global Issues Cluster alerted Brzezinski to this development in the Oc-
tober 19 evening report: “South Africa has begun a nation-wide human rights crackdown
with bannings of the major black newspapers, arrests of black leaders, and raids, deten-
tions, etc. This appears to be the largest effort of its kind since 1960.” (Carter Library, Na-
tional Security Affairs, Staff Material, Global Issues—Oplinger/Bloomfield Subject File,
Box 36, Evening Reports: 8–10/77)
