876 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI Iran and Brazil. One concrete problem is how we supply countries with plants without opening up charges of proliferation. Second, if the system of safeguards applies to ourselves, we would cause difficulties as a number of agreements already exist such as among the UK, France and Germany, and France and Japan. We should not apply the same discipline to the US as to Brazil or India. With respect to the three party and two party agreement, should we cancel them? We should have mutual trust. We should not leave the impression that we are bringing our agreements among ourselves into question. How can we meet our energy needs and achieve non-proliferation, or as little proliferation as possible? If we open up agreements among ourselves, we will not make much progress. I like the first few sentences of the US draft paper.6 Trudeau: President Giscard says we should discriminate in favor of ourselves. Chancellor Schmidt says we should treat everyone equal. This is a difference that is still not resolved. Although we will all be there tomorrow at the conclusion in Banquet Hall, we should have one spokesman so that our differences will not emerge. I think that it should be our Chairman. Callaghan: The public point is important and cannot but have international repercussions. I agree with Helmet on the press briefing. We should keep this type of discussion out of the press. We can try a form of words. Trudeau: We should not discuss the discrimination issue but simply talk about how we can meet energy requirements. President Carter: Perhaps we can use the first three sentences of the US draft. Schmidt: We can use those sentences and add that the group here has established a study of how this can be brought about. Andreotti: I agree with that type of statement. I wish to stress that there are countries who having signed the NPT, particularly Article IV, do not wish to see this contested once again. We should say that we are not discussing Article IV, or policy which has been established. Callaghan: Does anyone want to discuss Article IV? Schmidt: This is not being put under question. We should say that it stands up. Callaghan: Do we agree not to bring this into question? Trudeau: With India, they say their energy is also for peaceful use. Should we send more nuclear material to India? 6 Not found.
