United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 91 A specific action is needed to define and dramatize that goal - an action which will be significant both in itself and as a symbol of further effort to come; an action which will capture men’s imagination and mark the road we intend to travel in the period ahead. 2. The situation in Latin-America creates an occasion for just such action. This area is passing through rapid social change. Dictatorships and oligarchies which sought to repress this change are falling by the wayside. In their place, two groups are contesting for leadership of the continent: Moderate groups, which seek to carry out needed reforms through orderly methods. Extremist groups, led and symbolized by the Castro government, whose policies seem designed ultimately to detach Latin America from the free world. The most effective way we can intervene in this contest is by helping the moderate groups’ programs to succeed. This means extending help for such varied purposes as more schools, better paid teachers, housing, land reform and land clearance projects. Substantial U.S. help for these purposes will be the more needed if we are forced to move against Castro. Adverse reactions may be lessened if we can then hold out a promising alternative to Castroism. 3. The August session of the Congress provides an opportunity to create that alternative. It had been intended to request extra funds for the Special Fund of the Inter-American Bank in the next budget and to announce this at the meeting of the Committee of Twenty One in Bogotá. Why not make the request when the Congress reconvenes—­ perhaps in a substantially larger amount than presently contemplated? Such a request might well receive the support of both candidates and parties. It would permit us to channel the concerns which Castroism generates in the U.S. in a constructive direction. It would enable us to exploit the coming session for an affirmative foreign policy purpose. The action could be taken—­like the original Congressional contribution to the Inter-American Bank in September 1959 - wholly apart from the Mutual Security Program, it need not interfere with Congressional consideration of that Program. 4. This action could have world-­wide impact and implications. In presenting this request to the Congress, we could emphasize the growing need for “social infrastructure” assistance—­not only in Latin America, where we faced a particularly urgent problem, but elsewhere.
