Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 4. U.S. Contact with the PLO. Initially, we will probably be able to steer clear of any contact with the PLO apart from our normal security contacts in Beirut, which are publicly known. (The UN, the Lebanese Government, and members of the consultative groups in Beirut and Lebanon would have direct contacts right away with the PLO.) At some point, however, it may be necessary for us, if the potential gains are high enough, to decide to have contact with the PLO in the Lebanese context for the purpose of achieving an end of terrorist attacks on Israel, not only those launched from Lebanon but also those coming from within the occupied territories. The latter would be a particularly hard objective to achieve, but we believe we must try. The Israelis would, of course, react sharply to any contact and charge that we had violated our Sinai II commitment.3 Any contact would have to be justified on the following grounds: (a) It is an extension of our publicly announced security contacts. The objective is to enhance the security of the American mission and the people of southern Lebanon. (b) The “Sinai II Commitment” was made in a Memorandum of Agreement entitled “The Geneva Peace Conference” and relates entirely to the peace process. Contacts in Lebanon on Lebanese problems were not addressed, nor were they intended. Israel has never objected to our contacts on security in Lebanon. (c) The Israeli argument that contact constitutes recognition is not tenable; governments, including Israel’s, often have contacts which they acknowledge do not constitute recognition (e.g., Israel with Jordan). The issue would not be contact but the purpose of the contact. In the Lebanese context, contact would not constitute recognition of the PLO in the peace process and would not in any sense involve negotiation on issues related to the peace process. Nevertheless, we would have to expect strong Israeli objection. Our defense would lie in whatever success we achieved in ending violence. 5. Dealing with Israel. We will clearly have to keep the Israelis fully involved in an effort to encourage an evolution in their thinking. However, as noted above, we will also probably have to delay until later discussions with Israel on specific elements of the plan. Initially, we would set forth general targets for a moratorium on attacks on Israel, and our overall purpose of carrying out Resolution 425 (which Israel has accepted). At the moment, Weizman—perhaps without Cabinet backing—has modified Israel’s preemptive strike strategy by saying that Israel would not hit the Palestinians if the Palestinians did not hit Israel. It seems unlikely that we will get more from the Israelis in the near future until we are able to describe the readiness of other parties to make certain commitments. At some point, however, we will have to
