Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX would do some things differently if they had the opportunity, but we consider it highly unlikely that any of these persons could or would mount a challenge to Ceausescu. There are no expatriates of political significance, and it seems to be rule here that expatriation rapidly causes loss of whatever influence the person may have had within Romania (e.g. dissident author Paul Goma, now neutralized and sputtering impotently in Paris). Only individual of real stature not part of current regime or neutralized by it is former Prime Minister Ion Gheorghe Maurer who, at 77 and in fragile physical (but not mental) health, is universally considered to be too old to play a major role in Romania’s future. Security Forces 12. Security forces in Romania consist basically of regular military, para-military internal security (Securitate), and uniformed police (militia). Regular military is most important and seems to accept party control and civilian supremacy as embodied in POLEXCO and Ceausescu. Military are deeply involved in internal Romanian affairs and play a substantial and visible role in economic and social life—harvesting crops, supervising construction of Danube-Black Sea Canal and Bucharest metro, indoctrinating a largely conscript army in essentials of nationalism/patriotism. We have looked in vain for evidence of military’s political role and its influence upon internal decision making, but we assume it must be substantial albeit perhaps passive. Lack of hard information in this area is probably single biggest gap in our knowledge of Romanian internal political dynamics. 13. Internal security forces, as distinguished from professional military, constitute one of few potential elements of institutional disloyalty and therefore instability. Ceausescu’s principal power rival in mid- 1960’s, Alexandru Draghici, headed this organization; after Ceausescu’s triumph, with support from uniformed military, Draghici’s supporters were replaced by Ceausescu loyalists and entire organization has suffered a continuing and notable diminution in its power since then, accelerated in last year by Pacepa defection. Nevertheless, internal security forces should be considered armed and dangerous. Ceausescu still does not trust this organization—nor is he pleased with its work, as shown by relatively frequent and sharp Presidential criticism—and it is kept on a short leash. In spite of general anti-Soviet bias of most Romanians, including security officials, and constant stress on organization’s role in preventing internal subversion, Securitate resentment at erosion of its pre-Ceausescu status of a state within a state, coupled with greatly reduced opportunities for personal plunder of its members, could provide elements which Soviets or some future Romanian contender for power could potentially mobilize and use, although any such attempt would likely result in major and active conflict with the military. Similarly, and decision by Ceausescu,
