Chemical and Biological Weapons
275
round), particularly in the MOD. As reported Reftel B, he had been
struck by the anger of the military over the U.S. action in making public
its version of the BW incident at Sverdlovsk. This reaction, Israelyan
thought, was a factor in the hardening of the Soviet position on CW
verification. Flowerree said this hardening had not escaped the notice
of the U.S. Delegation. Israelyan went on to say that he had not been
asked to give his views on whether the talks should be continued, but
said that if he had, he certainly would have strongly urged that the
USSR not move to break them off. He had the strong impression that
Moscow was still firmly committed to the CW negotiations. He noted
wryly that in comparison with MBFR we were making great progress;
nothing had been put on paper in Vienna while there was ad refer-
endum agreement on a number of draft elements for the CW initiative.
5. Israelyan continued by saying that the attitude in Moscow was
such that no one believed there could be a CW agreement with the U.S.
in the present climate, even if the Soviets were able to accept the U.S.
position on verification 100 per cent. In his view there could be no
change whatsoever in the Soviet position before the U.S. elections, the
implications of which the Soviets will want to assess in establishing
their future arms control policies. In these circumstances he thought the
two Delegations should do what they could to continue movement in
the negotiations on secondary issues where there was a possibility of
agreement. Several such issues had already been raised in the bilaterals
and he had been encouraged by the apparent drawing together of the
positions of the two sides on these points. Israelyan concluded by
saying that he hoped Flowerree would not recommend an interruption
of the talks to his authorities in Washington.
6. Flowerree replied that he was going on the assumption that the
bilaterals would continue but the failure to achieve any significant
progress toward solving the major verification issues would inevitably
make it more difficult for the U.S. to maintain unilateral restraint in its
overall CW posture.
7. Israelyan also alluded to Soviet concern over how the U.S.
would handle CW in the CD context. Flowerree said that the USDEL
would not directly refer to the differences between U.S. and Soviet po-
sitions in the bilaterals, but as the Soviets knew from last year’s experi-
ence with the Dutch questionnaire, the U.S. was prepared to make
straightforward statements about its position on the issues. Israelyan
did not comment on the question of CW use in Afghanistan and South-
east Asia which had been raised most recently by the U.S. in the CW
plenary of May 27.
Helman
