186 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI would facilitate reaching agreement on a mobile ICBM verification regime. — Some believe that allowing geographically unlimited operational dispersals, as in the current approach, poses a severe verification risk. If a Deployment Area were large enough to ensure survivability, it would be possible to ban dispersals outside this area. Others believe, dispersals will still be required for rail-­mobile systems, and, in the past, the JCS military assessment has been that any geographic restrictions on operational dispersals is militarily unacceptable. Arguments in favor of retaining the existing position include: — The current verification provisions are compatible with both Minuteman basing and Southwest basing. — Monitoring confidence does not change substantially with the addition of a large Deployment Area or with the deletion of Restricted Areas. We will still have to monitor numbers of missiles within the Deployment Area and detect operations outside the Deployment Area. — Current requirements to report all movements from the Restricted Area would provide additional information on Soviet mobile operations. — No decision has been made on Small ICBM basing. Some believe, however, that we will more likely deploy the more restrictive Minuteman basing. Thus, the flexibility we gain from an alternate verification approach may be illusory, and it is in our interests to impose similar limitations on the Soviets. — Even if we decide to alter our position, we should not do so prior to returning to Geneva. If the Soviets wish a larger area, we should get something for agreeing to their request. Options—Road Mobile Basing Mode. Four options exist: — Option 1—Retain the existing position confining mobile ICBMs to a small Restricted Area. — Option 2—Alter the existing position to drop the small Restricted Area and adopt a larger Deployment Area. Movement is unrestricted within the Deployment Area and there is no requirement to notify movement within the Deployment Area. — Option 2A—Continue to allow operational dispersals without geographic limit. — Option 2B—Do not allow any dispersals beyond the Deployment Area. — Option 3: Alter the existing position to adopt a larger Deployment Area and very small Restricted Areas (perhaps no larger than missile-­ operating bases). Movement within the Deployment Area is unrestricted, but changes in the net number of missiles/launchers in each Restricted Area must be pre-­notified. The concept of exercise dispersals is eliminated.
