December 17, 1978–March 26, 1979 599 174. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Israel1 Washington, February 6, 1979, 1749Z 31592. For the Ambassador from the Secretary. Subject: (S) Message From President Carter to Prime Minister Begin on Resuming Middle East Negotiations. 1. (S entire text). 2. Please deliver following message from President Carter to Prime Minister Begin at the earliest opportunity.2 3. Begin text: Dear Mr. Prime Minister: I want to thank you for making Foreign Minister Dayan available for the useful talks with Prime Minister Khalil and Secretary Vance in Brussels,3 and for the time you spent with Ambassador Atherton during his recent visit to Jerusalem.4 Their reports have been helpful to me as I have reflected on how we can help President Sadat and you move forward in the peace negotiations. I want to share with you my thoughts on this critical question. I am deeply concerned that the more time that passes, the less favorable will be the prospects for success. I believe we should now make a major, determined effort to complete the task we started with such high hopes at Camp David in September. Secretary Brown will soon be in Israel,5 and I have asked him to discuss with you, among other things, our perception of the strategic 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P850061–2373. Secret; Niact Immediate, Nodis. Drafted by Atherton; cleared by Quandt, Sterner, Hansell, and Stanislaus R.P. Valerga (S/S–O); approved by Vance. Sent for information Immediate to Cairo and the White House. A draft version of this letter, bearing Carter’s handwritten amendments, and an attached, undated covering memorandum from Brzezinski to Carter upon which Carter initialed his approval is in the Carter Library, Brzezinski Donated Material, Subject File, Box 36, Serial Xs—(1/79–2/79). 2 Begin formally accepted Carter’s invitation in a letter to the President dated February 12. In his acceptance, Begin added, “I respectfully agree with you, Mr. President that the events in our region—the upheaval in Iran is one of them—make it necessary for the United States and the Israeli Government to hold serious consultations about the future, including consideration of contingency plans in connection with any possible development. We hope that such consultations will be held during the important visit of Secretary Brown to our country.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, President’s Correspondence with Foreign Leaders File, Box 10, Israel: Prime Minister Menachem Begin, 1/79–2/80) 3 See footnote 2, Document 162. 4 See Document 168. 5 See Document 176.
