Summaries of Compilations LXXVII Panama U.S. Relations With Panama Note: The parenthetical citations are to the numbered documents in the text U.S. relations with Panama during the final 3 years of the Eisenhower administration focused mainly on questions arising out of the administration of the Canal Zone, and upon the larger issue posed by the symbolic, but politically sensitive question of whether the Panamanian flag should be allowed to fly alongside the United States flag within the Canal Zone. For the Panamanian Government, the flag issue was one of burning domestic importance. There was no question of challenging U.S. control over the territory and operations of the Canal Zone, but there was a strong Panamanian desire to see recognition of Panamanian sovereignty over the territory of the Canal Zone by flying the Panamanian flag within the Canal Zone. On November 3 and November 28, 1959, popular frustration over the refusal of the United States to allow the Panamanian flag to be flown in the Canal Zone led to anti-American riots in Panama City. Relations between the United States and Panama remained strained until President Eisenhower authorized the Panamanian flag to be flown alongside the U.S. flag in the Canal Zone in September 1960. President Ernesto de la Guardia initiated a series of high-­level exchanges on the flag issue in a conversation with Dr. Milton Eisenhower during the visit of President Eisenhower’s brother to Panama in July 1958. (PM–3) In addition to the flag issue, Panamanian officials complained of a number of other irritants relating to the administration of the Panama Canal Zone. In a conversation with Secretary of State Dulles on October 8, 1958, Foreign Minister Miguel J. Moreno argued that the United States was not interpreting the Treaty of Mutual Understanding and Cooperation and the related Memorandum of Understanding, which had been signed on January 25, 1955, in the spirit in which they had been intended. (PM–8; for texts of the treaty and the accompanying memorandum, see Department of State Bulletin, February 7, 1955, pp. 238–243) President de la Guardia made a similar complaint in a letter to President Eisenhower on March 7, 1959 (PM–11) The Panamanian complaints alleged that the United States maintained a dual wage scale in the Canal Zone which discriminated against Panamanian employees, that a number of the best jobs in the Canal Zone were reserved for U.S. citizens under an unnecessarily broad security system, and that Panamanian enterprise suffered from unfair competition from imports of merchandise into the Canal Zone from “third country” source’s and
