3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
534
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
heads, to have their own even a small state, are deprived of that right.
This fact alone shows how shaky is the ground on which the separate
agreement between Israel and Egypt being imposed by the United
States is built.
They want to convince us that since the achievement of an overall
settlement in the Middle East would not come out now, one should
start, they say, with an agreement between Israel and Egypt and only
afterwards to try and seek a comprehensive settlement.
We are of a different opinion. What is being done now may suit the
Israeli and Egyptian leadership but it by no means suits the Arab
peoples. We think that Syria, Jordan and other Arab countries as well as
the Palestinians have equal rights and are equally interested in these
rights being ensured. Indeed, the present agreement itself has been
achieved entirely at the expense of the Egyptian side. But let the Egyp-
tian leadership answer itself for this before its own people, before the
other Arab peoples. It is clear, however, that in connection with a pos-
sible conclusion of the separate deal the number of acute issues will not
diminish but will increase.
Besides, there is a desire, behind all this, which one even hardly at-
tempts to conceal, to solve questions on the sly, bypassing the Soviet
Union. In this connection one cannot help wondering what is more
here, naivety or deliberate disregard of the legitimate rights of the So-
viet Union particularly in view of the closeness of that region to our
borders.
But the position of the USSR in the world cannot be changed at
someone’s wish. And we do not need at all someone’s authorization to
take interest in the development of the situation in the Middle East. No
one can shake our interest in establishing a lasting and just peace in the
Middle East.
Strange, to say the least, is an approach when despite earlier agree-
ments the US evades joint efforts with the USSR to ensure a compre-
hensive settlement in the Middle East and then we are even asked to
support separate deals.
And indeed, the fact is that provisions of principle regarding fu-
ture course of action in the Middle East were agreed between the USSR
and the US already when you, Mr. President, were in office. A Joint
Soviet-US statement on this score was worked out and published on
October 1, 1977.3 Shortly after that, however, it was nonchalantly
dropped by the US side. This not only dealt a blow at the efforts aimed
at achieving a Middle East settlement but in general was indicative of
how Washington sometimes treats achieved agreements.
3 See footnote 2, Document 52.
