National Security Policy  551
considerable disaffection among intellectuals, particularly among Soviet 
writers and university students. It is significant because it touches a 
highly vulnerable area, the regime’s ideological authority. Intellectuals 
are aware of the discrepancies between the Marxist-­Leninist ideal and 
Soviet reality and they also resent the regime’s encroachments on pri­
vate life and professional interests. They doubt that adequate safeguards 
exist to prevent the repetition of Stalinist terror. They feel contempt for 
Party careerists. They resent restrictions on travel abroad, and limita­
tions on access to Western publications and broadcasts. These discon­
tents do not take the form of active opposition but are limited for the 
most part to a retreat into an inner world so as to minimize the degree 
of involvement with the Party and the state.
43. There continues also to be dissidence among some national 
minorities. The peoples of the old Baltic states harbor vigorous 
Russophobe feelings. They feel strongly that they are exploited and that 
their homelands lag far behind their prewar cultural and living stan­
dards. A considerable residue of anti-Russian sentiment is also to be 
found in the western Ukraine, as well as in Georgia, where the down­
grading of Stalin and the loss of its former privileged status also rankle. 
It seems probable, furthermore, that many of the two million Jews in 
the Soviet Union would like to emigrate. Because many Jews hold key 
professional positions and have connections abroad, the regime proba­
bly regards them as a continuing security problem.
44. We do not believe that any of the discontents and tensions 
described above are likely to have major political significance during 
the period of this estimate, although they will place restrictions on the 
regime’s ability to mobilize the population for its own purposes. The 
regime will deal with them by its well-­practiced methods of conces­
sion and suppression. Moreover, its success in identifying with itself 
the sense of national pride and power, extending even to chauvinism, 
is a formidable asset with which to counter discontent. The Soviet peo­
ple are well aware that under Communist rule Russia has been trans­
formed from a backward, agrarian, defeated nation into the world’s 
second most powerful state, perhaps, they would like to believe, the 
most powerful. The Russian tradition takes it for granted that govern­
ment is by nature tyrannical, arbitrary, and exacting. If it fulfills the 
aspiration to national power, it can be forgiven much.
The Longer View
45. Have the processes of change which have operated so broadly 
and visibly in Soviet society since the death of Stalin opened up per­
spectives for more fundamental change in the long run? It seems unde­
niable that such a possibility exists. One source of such change could 
be a failure by the totalitarian Party repeatedly to renew its vitality; this 
might result in a dilution of its monopoly of power in favor of other
