Special Session on Disarmament 1201 the sorts of initiatives currently under study. A Presidential address should offer an ambitious 10-Year Disarmament Program, outlining long range goals and objectives for enhancing global security in such areas as strategic arms control and regional stability. ACDA will pull together agency suggestions for a 10-Year Disarmament Program into a draft for NSC review within the next week. No final decision was taken on the date for the US presentation. A proposal for extending negative security assurances beyond the President’s statement of October, 1977,2 is now being put into final form. Regional bureaus and JCS are particularly concerned about the impact of such an initiative on relations with our allies. More complete information is needed about the probable reactions of key allies. Some of this information may be obtained from the May 2 meeting of NATO disarmament experts, at which the UK proposal for negative security assurances may be discussed. When more information on allied attitudes is available and when the options paper has been completed, the issue will be raised for consideration at the SCC. The “eyes and ears of peace” proposal for US technical assistance for regional peace-keeping will be considered in the Backstopping Committee next week.3 Agencies were urged to make any technical objections to the proposal as precise as possible. Further consideration of our treatment of ERW at SSOD will be postponed until additional policy guidance is available. Within the next week, interagency agreement within the Backstopping Committee is anticipated on initiatives on regional confidencebuilding measures, nuclear accident reporting, and preferences for NPT parties. (The offer of fuel cycle services has been deleted from the latter proposal.) Views of State/EA will be solicited on the nuclear accidents initiative. A split paper is anticipated on the Disarmament/Development proposal for a UN Special Development and Security Fund. All these proposals, as well as the report of the group studying the cutoff proposal, will then be submitted to the SCC for decision or endorsement.
