Special Session on Disarmament
1201
the sorts of initiatives currently under study. A Presidential address
should offer an ambitious 10-Year Disarmament Program, outlining
long range goals and objectives for enhancing global security in such
areas as strategic arms control and regional stability. ACDA will pull
together agency suggestions for a 10-Year Disarmament Program into a
draft for NSC review within the next week. No final decision was taken
on the date for the US presentation.
A proposal for extending negative security assurances beyond the
President’s statement of October, 1977,2 is now being put into final
form. Regional bureaus and JCS are particularly concerned about the
impact of such an initiative on relations with our allies. More complete
information is needed about the probable reactions of key allies. Some
of this information may be obtained from the May 2 meeting of NATO
disarmament experts, at which the UK proposal for negative security
assurances may be discussed. When more information on allied atti-
tudes is available and when the options paper has been completed, the
issue will be raised for consideration at the SCC.
The “eyes and ears of peace” proposal for US technical assistance
for regional peace-keeping will be considered in the Backstopping
Committee next week.3 Agencies were urged to make any technical ob-
jections to the proposal as precise as possible.
Further consideration of our treatment of ERW at SSOD will be
postponed until additional policy guidance is available.
Within the next week, interagency agreement within the Backstop-
ping Committee is anticipated on initiatives on regional confidence-
building measures, nuclear accident reporting, and preferences for
NPT parties. (The offer of fuel cycle services has been deleted from the
latter proposal.) Views of State/EA will be solicited on the nuclear acci-
dents initiative. A split paper is anticipated on the Disarmament/De-
velopment proposal for a UN Special Development and Security Fund.
All these proposals, as well as the report of the group studying the
cutoff proposal, will then be submitted to the SCC for decision or
endorsement.
2 On October 4, 1977, Carter told the UN General Assembly that “In order to reduce
the reliance of nations on nuclear weapons, I hereby solemnly declare on behalf of the
United States that we will not use nuclear weapons except in self-defense; that is, in cir-
cumstances of an actual nuclear or conventional attack on the United States, our terri-
tories, or Armed Forces, or such an attack on our allies.” (Public Papers: Carter, 1977, pp.
1715–1723)
3 Reference is to a NSC proposal that the United States provide equipment to mon-
itor compliance with disarmament agreements to nations or regions who requested such
assistance.
