98 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III yen to the dollar, up from 300 yen to the dollar. This is a 12% appreciation in 6 months. It will help. We must also recognize the need for a follow-up to our discussions. I am pleased that President Carter suggested this too. We need this follow-up on other levels and in a variety of institutions, such as the DAC, IMF, OECD, IEA, GATT, etc. All meet separately rather than as part of one unified effort. But we should now attempt to get all of them to concert their efforts in the same direction. When the Finance Ministers meet in these various forums, they should be sure that everything is going in one direction. There is one trade problem I want to raise. Last year we saw a concentration of Japanese exports of color TVs. There was a torrent of exports. I will see that this is corrected. We all must avoid any inclination to protectionism. I am referring to the protectionism of the 1930s, especially 1934. We must not repeat this. This will weaken us vis-a`-vis the East and South. Today the Eastern Bloc is about as powerful as the Free World. If we are lax enough to sink to protectionism, it will be a tragedy. The OECD pledge is important even if we don’t repeat it. The spirit is important and we should make sure this spirit is upheld. Barre: I have three short points. This Summit can have major psychological value as well as practical value if followed up energetically. But it should not raise false hopes. We are, first of all, in a crisis of confidence. This is due basically to the fact that we have had 20 years of prosperity which has slowed down in recent times. Some thought that the slowdown would be a short-term phenomenon, and that soon we would return to the period before 1973–74. We should not allow this thought to continue. We should make public opinion aware of the facts, as President Giscard said. For instance, the oil-importing countries should recognize that the transfer of resources to exporters will reduce the possibility for increasing the quality of living and the standards of living in the developed countries. If we don’t do this, we will all expect too much over the short-term. Also confidence has been shaken because of uncertainties over the shortages of supplies and the problem of prices. I believe that the CIEC shows that the oil-importing countries are aware of this difficulty. The second problem is unemployment. We should not give the impression that our struggle against unemployment replaces our fight against inflation. These efforts must be undertaken side-by-side. We must continue to struggle against inflation which will lead to a reduction in unemployment as well. This should not be done in the Keynesian context of the 1930s. The labor situation has changed. People get unemployment benefits. They are not looking for just any employment, but are looking for a job they will accept. Many women are coming into the labor market and turnover has increased significantly. Youths
