Arms Control and Disarmament  1381
research agreements. After protracted negotiations, a comprehensive 
power agreement was concluded with Japan and awaits ratification. 
It authorizes the transfer of 2,700 kg of U–235 over the 10-­year life of 
the agreement. Ratification of the Venezuelan power agreement has 
been delayed following the change of government in that country.
Sweden has negotiated an amendment to raise the U–235 authoriza­
tion to 200 kg. Denmark will seek either a power agreement or major 
amendments to its present research accord. Brazil has requested an 
amendment to its research agreement to increase the U–235 authoriza­
tion from 6 to 12 kilograms. Brazil has not ratified its power agreement 
which is a separate accord from its research bilateral.
68. The United States now has 41 bilateral agreements in effect with 
39 nations and the City of West Berlin. (Switzerland has 2 agreements.) 
Of these, 12 are for power and 29 for research. An Agreement Status 
Table is attached as the Appendix.
69. Research Reactors. The Republic of China, the University of Pal­
ermo, Italy, and the University of Geneva, Switzerland, have signed 
contracts with U.S. manufacturers for research reactors and Brazil’s 
University of Minas Gerais plans to buy a research and training reactor. 
Twenty-­five U.S. commercial research reactors have been or are being 
built or contracted for in sixteen nations.
70. Eight reactor grants of $350,000 each were committed during 
the reporting period to Austria, Belgium, China, Greece, Israel, Italy, 
West Germany, and Sweden.
71. Equipment Grant Program. The Commission has approved a pro­
gram of equipment grants ranging from “package” research laboratories 
and subcritical assemblies to relatively minor items of equipment import­
ant to many underdeveloped countries. So far in FY ’58, $121,000 has been 
committed for radioisotope training equipment in Lebanon and Ecuador 
and for the two IAEA mobile radioisotope laboratories. It is expected that 
any FY 58 funds remaining after research reactor grant commitments 
have been completed will be obligated for equipment grants.
72. Education and Training. Between February 1949, when foreign 
nationals were first admitted, and June 1958, the Commission has pro­
vided training for 255 foreign nationals in the Oak Ridge Institute of 
Nuclear Studies Course in Radioisotope Techniques. Due to the excel­
lence of the course and its resultant international reputation, the demand 
for increased enrollment has been such that the Commission has recently 
expanded its facilities to accommodate 48 instead of 32 persons per 
course. The International School of Nuclear Science and Engineering, 
which was established at Argonne National Laboratory as a part of the 
Atoms-­for-­Peace program, has enrolled 328 foreign nationals in the first 
seven courses. Students for the 8th Session are now being selected.
73. The Equipment Grant and Education and Training programs 
will contribute directly to extending the impressive benefits of isotope
