El Salvador 579 compartmentation was even more serious and was practically strangling them. The President recognized this and asserted that an integrated market would strengthen all of Central America without any one country needing to lose dignity or any part of its independence. What is needed is for it to get started. The Salvadoran President declared his optimism for the future, especially with U.S. cooperation. Going back to his experience ten years ago in Europe, the President recalled that he had preached the idea of economic integration there. Now, in spite of difficulties, the European countries are approaching their goal, placing greater importance on the advantages and less on the risks of integration. President Lemus said that it was precisely these examples which stimulated them. President Eisenhower recalled some of the cooperative efforts in Europe, in which the U.S. had participated, which had stimulated the common market, such as the European coal and steel community, Euratom, and NATO. He admitted that we had been motivated by our own interest as well as that of our European allies. Minister of Economy Rochac, at the invitation of President Lemus, described the one-­hundred-­year effort of Central America to achieve political union, followed by the realization about ten years ago that such union could come about only as a result of economic integration. These efforts have now resulted in two treaties subscribed to in Tegucigalpa in June 1958, the first designed to free trade,2 and the second designed to achieve industrial integration.3 He alluded favorably to Dr. Milton Eisenhower’s Report and its suggestion that El Salvador and Honduras might carry out a pilot project in economic integration which seemed a more practical approach than waiting for all of the countries to agree on a method. Mr. Rochac recalled the recent visit of Messrs. Frank and Turkel from the Department, which had stimulated still further interest in the subject in his country and in Honduras. The public is very impatient and wants results rather than more studies. The Minister went back to the Central American wars at the close of the last century and recalled the role of the United States in the 1907 pact which had brought peace between the five countries. Central America can do a great deal by itself, but the United States, acting as a big brother, can help to 2 Reference is to the Multilateral Treaty on Free Trade and Central American Economic Integration (with annexes), signed by representatives of Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, and Nicaragua at Tegucigalpa, June 10, 1958, and entered into force June 2, 1959; for text, see 454 UNTS 47. 3 Reference is to the Agreement on the Regime for Central American Integration Industries, signed by representatives of Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, and Nicaragua at Tegucigalpa, June 10, 1958, and entered into force June 4, 1961; for text, see U.N. Economic Commission for Latin America, Multilateral Economic Cooperation in Latin America (E/CN.12/621), vol. I, p. 23.
