National Security Policy 1183 MAJORITY JCS in an attempt to develop an , and to insure some operational AICBM capability by the earliest possible date, both for its own value and to offset the practical and psychological disadvantages of possible Soviet claims of success in this field. c. Against the threat of missiles launched from ocean areas: The United States should strive to achieve and maintain an effective and integrated sea surveillance system that permits detection and tracking of surface ships and submarines operating within missile-launching range of the North American Continent; and should improve its related anti-­ submarine capability. Until technology permits the deployment of an effective active defense against submarine-­launched ballistic missiles, the principal measures of protection should be provided by the capa­ bility to attack prior to launch, and, in the case of non-­ballistic missiles, by elements of the air defense system. 13. Passive Defense. The United States should carry out those pas­ sive defense measures that will add significantly to its ability to protect its retaliatory capability and the survival of the other essential military elements of its national power, including with respect to: a. The retaliatory capability: Measures, such as increase in mobil­ ity, dispersal, hardening, reduction of reaction time, the capability to mount an airborne alert of SAC bombers, and protection of essential facilities including command and communications centers. b. The air defense forces: Similar measures, as appropriate, to reduce the vulnerability of air defense forces. c. The surviving military forces: Similar measures, as appropriate, to reduce the vulnerability of our other defense forces. 14. Response to Attack or Attack Warning. The United States should develop capabilities, procedures and doctrine adequate to provide secure command and control of its retaliatory and defensive forces within the time dimensions of a surprise ballistic missile attack. It is essential to ensure the survival of the decision-­making machinery and of reliable means of communication with the surviving retaliatory forces on land, at sea, and in the air. The United States must possess an effective and flexible response that is not necessarily dependent upon the survival of the seat of government and other vital units of the planned system for command and control. At the same time, it is essen­ tial to ensure launch and commitment of the counter-­offensive forces in response to attack or warning of attack with positive safe-­guard against commitment based on equivocal warning or attack information. 15. Alert Status of Air Defense Forces. The United States should con­ tinue to maintain the alert status of its primary air defense forces, and cooperate in improvement of Canadian primary air defense forces, so as to provide an immediate reaction to warning of an enemy attack.
