and implements of war in pursuance of the present Convention, mentioning
the quantities and destination of the arms, munitions and implements of war
to which the export licences refer. A copy of this return shall be sent to the
Central International Office.
“The High Contracting Parties further undertake to forward to the Central
International Office all information which they will be in a position to
provide relating to consignments under contracts entered into before the
coming into force of the present Convention.”
It is clear to the Department that any provision that the Central International Office
should be established by the Council of the League of Nations would be objectionable
and would seriously prejudice the prospect of the ratification of the Convention. It is
noted that provision is made in a subsequent Article for a “conditional or partial
adherence.” The Department feels, however, that it would be unfortunate for the
Convention to be drafted in a form to make amendments or reservations essential. You
should therefore endeavor to secure an alteration in Article Eight so that that Article
shall not provide for the designation of the International Office by the Council of the
League. In this connection the Department has noted, on pages 88 and 191 of the
League publication,50 that various proposals for the separation of the International
Office from the League have been made but not adopted by the League committees on
the ground, chiefly, that committees of the League could hardly themselves suggest that
the Central Committee be entirely divorced from the League. The International
Conference, however, being entirely independent of the League, would be in a different
position, and it would be appropriate for you to indicate this Government’s view that
the Central International Body should be established by agreement among the High
Contracting Parties or that it should be set up pursuant to the agreement of certain
specified Powers.
Upon the opening of the Conference the Department would be glad to receive from you
any further suggested formulae to cover this point which you feel might profitably be
suggested to the Conference.
It is further suggested that the last paragraph of Article Eight be omitted. There will be
considerable time between the signature of any convention and its going into effect.
Arms manufacturers will be clearly on notice as to the conditions which they may be
called upon to meet, in the event the Convention is made effective, and it would
therefore seem proper that all shipments after Convention goes into effect should be
subject to its terms, whether contracted for prior to or after such date. It would seem
unnecessary, and perhaps prove to be impracticable, to endeavor to secure specific
information relating to shipments made before the coming into force of the convention
since the legal provisions for securing such information might not then be in effect in
certain countries. However, in view of the fact that the United States already secures
