940 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 fied] Bazaari merchants are growing increasingly anti-Khomeini as a result of the chaotic economic conditions in Iran. [less than 1 line not declassified] the leaders of a large group of Iranian “homofars” (military non-commissioned officers who are technical specialists), who were in the vanguard of the anti-Shah revolution, recently approached former Prime Minister Bazargan complaining that the revolution was being “betrayed.” The homofar leaders, who claim control over 5,000 armed military personnel, asked Bazargan to suggest a means by which they could “seize control” of the revolution. [portion marking not declassified] 4. The above two paragraphs are examples of a general trend in the erosion of support for Khomeini among the key segments of Iranian society that brought him to power. If the elements required to bring about a change of government in Iran—a credible opposition leadership, an organization inside Iran, and the erosion of support for Khomeini among the dynamic elements of society—the latter was always perceived as the most difficult. This erosion may have begun and it might be possible to speed up the process [less than 1 line not declassified]. 5. In sum, I continue to believe that it would be to the U.S. advantage to reinforce this impression of patriotic internal opposition to Khomeini, but that if we don’t start soon we will not have such a capability for some time to come. [portion marking not declassified] Stansfield Turner3 3 Printed from a copy with Turner’s typed signature and an indication that he signed the original. 359. Editorial Note On September 10, 1980, the Iranian Majlis gave an overwhelming vote of confidence to the government of Mohammed Ali Rajai, who had become the Prime Minister in August, and approved the 14 members he had nominated to his Cabinet. (Telegram 241776 to all diplomatic and consular posts, September 11; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800433–0232) Mohammad Karim Khodapanahi became Minister of Foreign Affairs. Following the appointment of the
