Afghanistan
833
object of discrimination on both ethnic and religious grounds. The area
originally fell to the insurgents almost by default. The Afghan military,
concentrating on Pathan insurgency in the east, could spare few troops
to hold the Hazara area, and since the summer of 1978, all of the area
except for the main towns has been in insurgent hands. Government
operations were largely confined to the relief of threatened posts and
a few half-hearted efforts that opened the road between Kabul and
Herat for only brief periods.
There has been little change since the invasion. The Hazaras have
kept up pressure on government forces. For their part, the Soviets have
left the area primarily to the Afghan Army. Their one major incursion
into the area, a multibattalion offensive in late April, may have been
designed partly to demonstrate that the Soviets could move into the
area. Within a few days after the end of the clearing operation, the
Hazaras appear to have regained all they held previously.
Despite their control of the countryside, the Hazaras have been
unable to take major towns. Tarin Kowt in Oruzgun has been under
pressure for well over a year, Chaghcharan has been isolated as long,
and insurgents have penetrated Bamian’s defenses, but none of the
three provincial capitals has been taken and held.
The motivation of the Hazaras in fighting the government and the
Soviets is somewhat different than that of other Afghans. It results
in part from past discrimination, and from their resentment of the
dominance of the Marxist governments (as well as all their predeces-
sors) by Sunni Pathans. The Hazaras also have probably been inspired
and influenced more by the Iranian revolution than other Afghans,
apparently gaining renewed pride in their Shiism. Iran has, however,
been an inspiration to Sunni Afghans, too; pictures of Ayatollah Kho-
meini have been posted in Sunni cities such as Qonduz. Hazara resent-
ments have played a part in urban unrest in Kabul, where Hazaras
have been in the forefront of anti-government activity.
Baghlan
In Baghlan province the insurgents have staged sporadic attacks
against Soviet convoys and, despite Soviet clearing operations, they
control the relatively unimportant eastern part of the province. The
Soviets, nevertheless, have been able to keep the main road open—
their major objective in the province—to control all major towns, and
to establish a major logistic base at the important crossroad at Pol-
e-Khomri.
Takar
Takar province was not a serious problem for the government prior
to the Soviet invasion, but insurgency has increased there since. In
