586  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
Whatever his leaning, the President ought to give the most seri-
ous consideration to involving the Congressional leadership through 
consultation prior to the decision. (I know of no such effort so far by 
the White House.) Of course, Congress has been kept abreast of the 
proceedings inside DOD through OSD and Air Force channels. My 
impression is that this has softened opposition to MPS a great deal 
and perhaps even created some pressure for it, but these reports come 
from biased Air Force sources. In any case, the President has a right to a 
clear view of Congressional sentiment before he makes his decision. He 
would profit from such consultations. They could take off some of the 
political heat and make the final choice go down more easily, especially 
in relation to SALT ratification, by sharing the responsibility a bit. (TS)
I see four possible scenarios: one good, one marginal, and two 
disasters. They are influenced by my own judgment as to what is 
required for strategic security, and by my sense of the political setting.
1. Good Scenario: MPS
The President decides for the MPS option. He declares that we 
definitely need a new ICBM for essential equivalence, survivability, 
endurance, and flexibility. He notes that this is the most cost effective of 
the serious alternatives and probably half as costly as the equivalent air 
mobile option. He reports that his doubts about the verification prob-
lem have been largely laid to rest: We can make our MPS verifiable. 
With the same cooperation, a like Soviet system would also be verifi-
able.2 Moreover, mobile alternatives the Soviets are likely to prefer and 
which cannot be simply denied the Soviets, i.e., truck, are likely to be 
even harder to verify. Only were we able to ban all kinds of land-­mobile 
deployment modes—­which is unrealistic—­can we avoid the kinds of 
verification challenges requiring cooperation as in MPS. (TS)
Should the Soviets not be cooperative on verification modalities 
for MPS, or whatever mobile ICBM mode they choose, or should they 
otherwise give us serious concern about a breakout threat of more RVs 
to swamp our MPS target array in the later 1980s, then we would have 
to consider enlarging the number of shelter/aim points and building 
an ABM defense overlay (which could be very efficient because it could 
preferentially defend only full holes while the Soviets would have to 
attack all of them as though they were full and defended). (TS)
MPS basing would leave us the path of reducing land-­based ICBMs 
in the future, first those in silos, and then those in mobile deployments. 
A major virtue of the MPS systems is that the number of missiles in 
it can be reduced without allowing the enemy to “gang up” on and 
2 Brzezinski underlined the word “cooperation” and drew a vertical line in the left 
margin next to this sentence.
