Uruguay 1183 Uruguayan Economic Improvement The present Uruguayan Administration has moved slowly to improve the country’s economic situation. It has succeeded so far in stabilizing the international value of the Uruguayan peso, in taking a major step to eliminate the system of multiple exchange rates with many beneficial results, in coming closer to balancing the budget, in significantly restricting credit, in stopping the drain on the gold balances of the central bank, and in slowing down the increase in the cost of living. A major benefit from the elimination of the system of multiple exchange rates was to place international trade at the beginning of 1960 on a completely multilateral basis and eliminate bilateralism and discrimination. Another benefit was to increase the effective returns from important export products, creating new incentives for additional production. Another benefit to the economy was the elimination of costly subsidies of certain imports, both for consumption and for aid to industry. The Blanco Administration has shown an admirable steadfastness of purpose in proceeding with steps toward economic stabilization, over the obstacle of much clamor from the Opposition and particularly the Communists and their Socialist allies. Moreover, slow governmental procedures had been made slower by many differences of opinion within the Blanco ranks and by the exceedingly slim Blanco majority in the Legislature—50 out of 99 members in the Chamber of Deputies. Much of the credit for the progress which has been made is due to the Minister of Finance, Contador Juan AZZINI, who has a clear conception of his course, and to the comparative political imperturbability of the two main characters in the nine-­man Presidential Council (the National Council of Government), Chairman Benito NARDONE and next year’s Chairman, Victor HAEDO. The steady inflation that had come about from years of overspending and subsidizing favored urban and industrial elements in the population has had the natural effect of raising living costs in comparison with individual income. After having spent and subsidized for years to perpetuate itself in office, the List 15 Colorado Administration became discredited because the voters began to discover that they had to pay the bill through reduced individual real income. And then, ironically, the one period in which this trend was felt the most keenly was the part of 1959 after the Blanco Administration took over on March 1. In recent months, wage increases in many industries have been greater than cost-­of-­living increases, tending partly to restore real income. The Government’s four-­year budget is about to be passed by the Legislature with substantial wage increases for Government employees, which anticipate to some extent the fact that increases cannot be
