Shortly after said discussion I received a letter from you requesting me to
furnish you with a more specific description of the nature of the bonds my
Government intends to issue. In a letter ddo. August 2nd, addressed to you,
I expressed the hope that I shall be able to comply with your request in the
near future. However, some unforeseen delays and complications interfered
with a speedy dispatch of this matter and it is only now that I am in a
position to lay before you a complete proposal, carefully planned by my
Government in a special Cabinet Council.
I would greatly appreciate an appointment by you of a certain date and hour
agreeable to you, when I may lay before you this proposal and discuss it
with you in detail.
For your immediate information follows roughly outlined a sketch of the
offer made by my Government.
The Austrian Government is ready to turn over to the United States
Government, Austrian Government bonds to the extent of the Austrian
property held by the Alien Property Custodian. These bonds would serve as
a security for the American claims. In case these bonds should exceed the
amount of American claims awarded by the Tripartite Claims Commission,
the American Government will return to the Austrian Government the
portion in surplus of the claims and vice versa, the Austrian Government
will issue an adequate amount of additional bonds in case the American
claims reach a figure in excess of the Austrian property held by the Alien
Property Custodian.
These bonds will, as far as they are covered by American claims, be a
charge upon the assets and revenues of the Republic of Austria in the
meaning of article 197 of the Treaty of St. Germain,32a second only to the
charge of the League of Nations Loan upon the proceeds from the customs
and tobacco-monopoly and of the so-called reliefcredits. The interest will
run from the date whenever a portion of the American claims has been
ascertained and awarded. The bonds will pass from such date into the
public-debts of Austria and form a part thereof. They will be provided with
interest-coupons. They will be issued to bearer, in denominations of
$10,000.00 each. In the wording of the text it will be clearly expressed that
