822  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
extreme concentration of capacity but does not yet include allowances 
otherwise for massive nuclear damage.
Imports of strategic materials from nearby areas would be relied 
upon to provide $2.3 billion in materials in the 3-­year emergency.
After allowing for U.S. production and nearby imports (excluding 
overseas sources), about $4 billion in strategic materials would need to 
be supplied by the strategic stockpile.
Total Government inventories of strategic materials amounted to 
about $7.2 billion on December 31, 1958, valued at market prices as of 
that date. The composition of the inventory was as follows, in millions 
of dollars:
Stockpile-­Grade Materials Having Objectives
Strategic stockpile
$5,777
Defense Production Act inventory
632
Supplemental stockpile
327
Commodity Credit Corp. inventory (obtained by barter)
245
Tin inventory (residual from Texas smelter)
9
Department of the Interior inventory (domestic purchases)
13
Materials Not Meeting Specifications or Having Objectives
170
$7,173
The total quantity of strategic materials on order for all Government 
programs, including barter, was about $865 million on December 31.
Thus the total market value of materials on hand or on order was 
about $8 billion or about twice the total of the present maximum stock­
pile objectives.
In view of this status of the strategic materials programs, the two 
chief problems now relate to (1) the size and character of the stockpile 
needed in the light of present-­day conditions and (2) policy on disposal 
of materials that are not needed. These problems and collateral policy 
problems are discussed below.
Recommendations:
Recommendation #1. Determination of Strategic Stockpile Objectives
Determine stockpile objectives on the basis of time required for supplies 
of materials in a national emergency to match essential needs of the emer­
gency. Until such time as the essential needs of the nation after a nuclear attack 
(including reconstruction) can be determined by a pending OCDM study, the 
period of emergency used as a basis for planning will be limited to a maximum 
of three years; provided that, until such determination is made, the maximum
