302  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
CH–38.	
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Director of the 
Office of West Coast Affairs, Bureau of Inter-American 
Affairs (Coerr)1

Washington, June 16, 1960.
SUBJECT
United States Assistance to Chile.
PARTICIPANTS
President Eisenhower
Mr. Robert Merriam, The White House
Ambassador Muller of Chile
Mr. Jorge Schneider, Special Representative, Chilean Government
Mr. Wymberley Coerr, Department of State
Responding to the President’s inquiry as to the present situation in 
Chile’s disaster area, the Ambassador described the plight of Valdivia. 
He said it lay along the San Pedro River which normally drained Lake 
Riñihue but had been blocked by an accidental dam that could burst at 
any moment. He described the Chilean Army’s efforts to build tempo-
rary dams above the lake while simultaneously trying to dig channels 
through the San Pedro River blockage so as to drain the lake’s excess 
water without flooding Valdivia. In response to the President’s ques-
tion, the Ambassador confirmed that the United States Government has 
sent an engineer who is an expert in flood control to assist the Chilean 
Army in this job.
The Ambassador went on to express his hearty thanks for the 
wonderfully prompt and efficient American aid that he said had had 
a terrific impact on the Chilean people. He read aloud resolutions 
of appreciation that had just been passed by the Chilean House of 
Deputies and Senate. Observing that these resolutions had been passed 
unanimously, he consented that Chile was a very democratic country, 
that such unanimity was exceedingly rare and therefore evidenced 
widespread gratitude.
Thanking the Ambassador for having read these resolutions, the 
President declared he was glad to know the United States’ aid had 
been useful. He said that, although he himself was wary of the danger 
of over-­publicizing United States aid, some private citizens had been 
talking to him urging that something spectacular be done to drama-
tize United States sympathy for Chile. For example, it had been sug-
gested to him that Chile had a tremendous need for doctors and nurses 
1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Project Clean Up, “Chile.” Official Use Only.
