National Security Policy  85
Joint Staff structure should come out. Mr. McElroy said they are planning 
to drop out the committees, at least on an experimental basis.
Mr. McElroy said they are also planning to recommend eliminating 
the service “roles and missions” from law, and the President enthusias­
tically endorsed this action.
The President referred to a plan announced by Mr. Vinson and 
other Congressmen yesterday. It showed considerable signs of being a 
reversion to a three-­department setup. He thought that if the authority 
of the Secretary of Defense were thus reduced the position would be 
untenable and should be abolished. In that case, the result might be that 
Congress would also be organized in comparable committees.
The President indicated some question regarding the element 
called the “Joint Secretaries.” Mr. McElroy said that there will be many 
problems of personnel, administration and procurement which will 
require coordination. He reiterated that research is a great problem. The 
President advised them to talk with Dr. Killian, and Mr. Coolidge said 
they are trying to arrange a time to get together. The President said he 
rather liked the idea of the Defense Research Institute.
In summarizing, the President said that the essence of the matter 
is to establish the power of the Secretary of Defense to get things done 
and to go into everything that needs corrective action. He suggested that 
the group get their thoughts into the most simplified form possible—one 
that could be put out to the public should there be a decision to do so.
A.J. Goodpaster
Brigadier General, USA
22.	
Memorandum of Conference with the President1
Washington, March 3, 1958
OTHERS PRESENT
Mr. Gordon Gray
General Goodpaster
Mr. Gray first discussed his proposal to send letters of appoint­
ment to Emergency Agency designees. He drew the President’s atten­
tion to the fact that the proposed titles for the agencies used the word 
1 Source: Emergency planning; Net Evaluation Subcommittee work. Secret. 2 pp. 
Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, DDE Diaries. Drafted on March 4.
