Costa Rica 413 (3) a study of the domestic and foreign markets, including revenue from tourism; (4) a reexamination of government organization, financing, taxes and trade policies, with the purpose of seeing whether they could not be more effective in developing the economy of the country and supporting and regulating private investment. The contacts of the Fact-Finding Mission were uniformly friendly with people from all walks of Costa Rican life and while there may have been occasional misinterpretation of U.S. motives, no feeling of hostility toward the United States was at any time apparent. The President and his Cabinet gave evidence of their whole-­hearted support for the United States on the international scene and understanding of the problems of the United States. President Echandi stated specifically that there was too much of a tendency in Latin American countries to believe that the United States could solve all of their economic problems for them. CR–10. Despatch from the Chargé in Costa Rica (Godfrey) to the Department of State1  San José, July 30, 1958. No. 42. SUBJECT Analysis of United States and Other Assistance Programs in Costa Rica In conformity with the Department’s Circular Telegram of May 5, 1958,2 there is provided the following overall analysis of United States objectives and the role of various United States and non-United States programs in Costa Rica for fiscal year 1960. Since Ambassador Willauer was suddenly called to Washington3 it was impossible for him to review this despatch. However, the substance of the message was reviewed with him and the points included in the “special objectives” section were ­dictated by him. 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 718.5-MSP/7–3058. Official Use Only. 2 Circular telegram 1043 to San José and certain other U.S. diplomatic missions called for an analysis by the Chief of Mission of the foreign assistance programs in the host country for fiscal year 1960. (120.171/5–558) 3 Willauer left San José, July 28, 1958, for consultations with Treasury officials in Washington on reallocation of UFCO’s taxes. He returned to San José on August 15.
