660 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII groups formed by cross-alliances and membership in more than one group. The major exile groups are: A. (U) the Islamic Revolution Movement, headed by Mohammad Nabi Mohammedi; B. (U) the Afghanistan National Liberation Front (ANLF), headed by Sebqatullah Mojadedi; C. (U) the Jamaat-i-Islami Afghanistan, headed by Burhanhddin Rabbani; D. (U) the Hezb-e-Islami (HI), headed by Gulbuddin Hekmatyar; E. (U) the National Front for the Islamic Revolution of Afghanistan (NFIRA), headed by Sayed Gailani. These groups vary from right-wing professional revolutionaries to Islamic orientation. 2. (U) Exact numbers for members of each category are virtually impossible to ascertain since members of tribes operating in Afghanistan can be claimed, at various times, to be conducting the insurgency either independently or as members of one or more of the exile groups based in Pakistan. However, the NFIRA group, headed by Gailani, has claimed approximately 70,000 members. 3. (S) The insurgents evince virtually no interest, with minor exceptions, in territorial control in a conventional sense. Therefore strongholds in the conventional sense are non-existent. Currently the insurgents hold no major city. However, with territorial control being highly relevant to the government, fighting has gravitated towards towns where government forces are located. The best approach in delineating rebel areas of operation is by province. The provinces where rebel activity is currently most severe are Kabul, Paktia, Laghman, Bamian and Ghowr. Rebel activity has also been severe in Konar and Nangarhar Provinces, however, recent Afghan/Soviet combined army operations and continued presence in these areas has restored a modicum of government control. Conditions suggest that Kandahar, Kunduz and Baglan are now beset with serious rebellion. In other provinces moderate levels of rebellion occur. The rebellion is currently least serious in Faryab, Jowzjan, and Bulkh. The arrival of Soviet forces in Takhar and Badakhshan Provinces has tended to stabilize conditions there. 4. (S) Afghan insurgents use a variety of weapons ranging from side arms to artillery, the majority of which were either captured or acquired from Afghan Army units or personnel who defected. These weapons include 76, 82 and 107mm mortars; 76mm mountain artillery; 107mm recoilless; 122mm guns; 122mm howitzers; tanks; APCs; AAA guns; rocket launchers; English .303, Kalashnikov and Dushka rifles; bombs; grenades; mines and various side arms. Tactics range from simple ambushes of convoys to attacks on Soviet and Af Army units and include H and I fire, mining roads, blowing bridges, opening floodgates, sabotaging water supplies, cutting telephone lines, and destroying electric power plants. 5. (U) As stated, the vast majority of the insurgent equipment was obtained in raids or from deserting Af Army units and personnel.
