Eastern Europe Region 159 and investing it in interest-bearing securities which could be used to pay off the US claimants. —Other possible steps include: —Refusal to discuss MFN. —Refusal to discuss signature of the US-Czechoslovak Cultural Agreement. —Pressures on US firms not to engage in large projects with Czechoslovakia.6 Bulgaria —Bulgaria is likely to be a lukewarm supporter of Soviet action in Poland. They would certainly lend their rhetorical support and possibly even a small military unit but they would take refuge in the thought that Poland is far away and Bulgarian interests not at stake. —There are two specific steps we could take with Bulgaria to express our displeasure. —Refusal to pursue further the Bulgarian initiative to discuss MFN. —Indefinite postponing of the signing of the US-Bulgarian Maritime Agreement.7 Hungary —Hungary is likely to be the least enthusiastic supporter of Soviet action in Poland next to Romania. They have evidently been pressured by the Soviets, East Germans and Czechoslovaks to take a more outspoken stand on Poland and would certainly go along formally with any kind of Warsaw Pact action. Yet their heart would certainly not be in it and they would fear greatly for Hungary’s increasingly beneficial image as a country adhering only formalistically, where possible, to the alliance with Moscow. We have made more progress in our relations with Hungary over the last years than with any other EE country and it would be contrary to our interests to penalize an obviously reluctant partner in a Warsaw Pact undertaking by taking steps we will not be able to reverse. 6 In telegram 4597 from Prague, December 17, the Embassy reported its agreement with the general thrust of the paper, but stressed that the United States should make a best effort to finalize negotiations on the Gold/Claims agreement. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800600–0376) 7 In telegram 3315 from Sofia, December 17, Ambassador Perry cautioned that the paper did not address U.S. policy in case of an internal crackdown by the Polish regime. Perry recommended that the Department not “‘set’ policy responses so that possible nuances of the situation can be ignored.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800599–0886)
