3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–June 1979
509
terests are best served by an approach that respects the basic interests
of all countries, and we are therefore determined to act in such a way
that no country need fear that its interests are jeopardized. This will be
our attitude towards arms sales or any other proposals that may arise
in the course of future relations with China.
I welcome this opportunity to exchange views on a matter which
we understand is important to you, and I am confident that you will
appreciate the responsibility and seriousness of our approach to the
matters you raised.
I would not wish to close without expressing again my earnest
hope that we can move without further delay toward the successful
conclusion of our SALT negotiations and an early meeting. I firmly be-
lieve that when we are able to discuss these and other important
matters face-to-face with complete cordiality and frankness, it will con-
tribute constructively to a further desirable improvement in relations
between our two countries.
Sincerely,
Jimmy Carter
170.
Memorandum Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1
Washington, January 30, 1979
THE SOVIET DISSIDENT SCENE
SINCE MID-1978
The Soviet regime’s behavior toward dissidents since the highly publi-
cized trials last July2 has been a mixture of selective repression and guarded
tolerance. The regime apparently continues to view the various dissident
groups as a serious political problem. But rather than incurring the costs of
draconian policies to root out all dissenters, the regime has adopted a strategy
to contain the dissent. The latter entails on the one hand harassment and at
times severe punishment of leading activists and on the other hand enhanced
emigration of Soviet Jews and a cautious flexibility toward other religious and
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Global Issues,
Bloomfield Subject File, Box 17, Human Rights: USSR: 7/77–5/79. Confidential. Prepared
in the CIA’s National Foreign Assessment Center.
2 Reference is to the trials of the Helsinki Monitoring Group, July 1978.
