National Security Policy  205
59.	
Memorandum of Discussion at the 367th NSC Meeting1
Washington, May 29, 1958
SUBJECT
Discussion at the 367th Meeting of the National Security Council, Thursday, 
May 29, 1958
Present at the 367th NSC Meeting were the President of the 
United States, presiding; the Acting Secretary of State; the Secretary of 
Defense; and the Director, Office of Defense Mobilization. Also pres­
ent were Mr. Fred C. Scribner, Jr., for the Secretary of the Treasury; 
the Acting Director, Bureau of the Budget; the Special Assistant to 
the President for Atomic Energy; the Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff; 
the Director of Central Intelligence; the Deputy Secretary of Defense; 
Assistant Secretary of Defense McGuire; the Assistant to the President; 
the Deputy Assistant to the President; the Director, U.S. Information 
Agency; the Director, International Cooperation Administration; 
the Special Assist­ants to the President for Information Projects, for 
National Security Affairs, for Science and Technology, and for Security 
Operations Coordination; the White House Staff Secretary; Assistant 
Secretary of State Smith; Assistant Secretary of Defense Sprague; the 
Naval Aide to the President; Mr. Harrell B. Altizer and Mr. Donald 
Schwartz, Department of Defense; the Executive Secretary, NSC; and 
the Deputy Executive Secretary, NSC.
There follows a summary of the discussion at the meeting and the 
main points taken.
[Omitted here are agenda items 1–2.]
3. STATUS OF MILITARY MOBILIZATION BASE PROGRAM
(NSC Actions Nos. 1680 and 1698; NSC 5707/8, paragraph 47; NSC 
5810/1)
General Cutler briefed the National Security Council on the sub­
ject item. (A copy of General Cutler’s briefing note is filed in the min­
utes of the meeting, and another is attached to this memorandum.) He 
then called on Assistant Secretary of Defense E. Perkins McGuire, who 
read his report with the assistance of visual aids. (A copy of Secretary 
McGuire’s report is filed in the minutes of the meeting.)
At the conclusion of Secretary McGuire’s report, General Cutler 
first called on Secretary McElroy, who complimented Secretary McGuire 
and said he had nothing to add.
1 Source: Agenda item 3: Status of Military Mobilization Base Program. Top Secret; 
Eyes Only. Extracts—3 pp. Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, NSC Records.
