Czechoslovakia 319 Soviet leaders. His greatest service was to persuade the KSS to repudiate the clandestine KSC Congress of 22 August 1968, which had condemned the invasion, endorsed Dubcek, and otherwise defied Soviet wishes. Elected KSS First Secretary and a member of the KSC Presidium, Husak adopted positions designed to ingratiate himself further with Moscow. His longstanding espousal of federalization also assured him the support of his fellow Slovaks. By April 1969, the Soviet Union considered him sufficiently reliable to succeed Dubcek as KSC First Secretary. [classification not declassified] Although Husak had won a degree of Soviet confidence, he was not given free rein. Aware that reprisals against supporters of the late reforms would be highly unpopular, he reportedly favored greater leniency than Moscow was willing to allow. As “normalization” proceeded, Husak’s attempts at moderation were overruled, presumably with Soviet approval, by a coterie of conservatives, the most militant being Vasil Bilak and Antonin Kapek. The hardliners succeeded in securing the ouster of some 300,000 party members by the end of 1970 and have since managed—against Husak’s publicly stated preference— to block any meaningful rehabilitation. [classification not declassified] Discord between Husak and the more conservative Presidium members has not been confined to the issue of purges and rehabilitation. In recent years, debate over economic policy has moved increasingly to the fore. At the 15th Party Congress in April 1976, both Husak and Premier Lubomir Strougal called for innovation in this area. Their proposals disturbed ideological hardliners, one of whom, Milos Jakes, responded with a warning that the need to maintain effective party control must be paramount over other considerations. [classification not declassified] The prospect of economic innovation is repugnant to the conservatives for two reasons. It raises again the issues of the early 1960s, which paved the way for Dubcek’s liberalization, and it holds implications for cadre policy that the ideologues must regard as threatening: if the party is to preside over a major economic reorganization, then the criteria for evaluating members must be substantially revised. Instead of ideological orthodoxy and political reliability, which have prevailed since 1970 and have created the conservatives’ political base, members must be judged primarily for their managerial efficiency and technical expertise. As these criteria are progressively applied, the position of the conservatives will weaken, to the benefit of Husak and the moderate pragmatists within the leadership. [classification not declassified] Calls for economic innovation and exhortations to improve the performance of party cadres were conspicuously juxtaposed in statements by party leaders during the months following the 15th Congress, when strenuous behind-the-scenes debate apparently took place. The
