928 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI 177. Paper Prepared in the Department of State1 December 8, 1990 START Need to resolve some big issues soon if we are to be in a position to complete START. Data Denial We have agreed to ban practices that deny full access to telemetry. Three major issues remain. One—­exemptions—­is being handled in Geneva. On the other two—­information exchange and power level— Amb. Bartholomew gave you a new proposal. The essential features are: — The sides would exchange tapes of telemetry broadcast during each flight of an ICBM or SLBM. — The sides would exchange information sufficient to interpret that data. This is something you have pressed for. Re-­entry vehicle data would be excluded from this requirement. — In the rare event that a side determines that disclosure of an anomaly during a specific flight test would create significant national security concerns, it would be allowed to delete from the information exchange those specific portions necessary to protect data relating to the national security concern. Information on all other portions of the flight would be provided. — If a side elected to withhold information, it would notify the other side and provide a rationale for the deletions. — The sides would undertake to use this exemption rarely, only in cases of genuine risk to security. To prevent abuses, such withholding would be subject to a small annual quota. — On power level, we propose that transmission practices for future types of missiles be negotiated in the Joint Compliance and Inspection Commission to ensure that each side can receive the telemetry transmissions of the other side. — Since it would be extremely costly to reconfigure current missiles that have already been designed and built, we propose that for existing types of ICBMs and SLBMs, each side use its existing practices to transmit telemetry — The provisions for telemetry transmission for existing types of ICBMs would apply to the US Small ICBM. This compromise would mean that for future missile types, there would be equal burdens and obligations. For current missile types, current practices would continue. 1 Source Department of State, Policy Planning Staff, Lot 03D102, Dennis Ross Files, US/USSR Ministerial, Houston, Texas, December 9–12, 1990. Secret. No drafting information was found. Shevardnadze met with Baker in Houston December 9–11 to discuss the situation in the Persian Gulf and other matters. Memoranda of conversations pertaining to START were not found.
