793.00/71 [Document 646] The British Chargé (Chilton) to the Acting Secretary of State MANCHESTER, MASS., July 7, 1925. [Received July 8.] No. 683 SIR: With reference to the correspondence on the subject of the situation in China ending with my note No. 682 of July 6th, I have the honour to inform you, by instructions of His Majesty’s Principal Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, that His Majesty’s Government are disposed to think that the dangers of the Chinese situation would be diminished if a joint declaration could forthwith be made publicly by the nine Powers signatory to the Washington China Treaties indicating their readiness to expedite the tariff conference and warning Chinese factions of the consequences if the present agitations should make a meeting of the Conference impossible. His Majesty’s Government have accordingly drafted a declaration, the terms of which are as follows: — “The Washington Customs Treaty81 provided for the early convocation of a conference at which by the agreement between China and the nine Powers, certain economic measures should be adopted for the benefit of China as a whole. The spirit animating the Powers remains today what it was then. Various subsequent changes in the situation which have delayed the meeting of a conference have not affected the original intentions of the Powers; on the contrary, they have confirmed these intentions whilst the Powers themselves consider that the objects of the Washington Conference are to fulfill an agreement to be reached at the Tariff Conference which will require to be of a more far-reaching and comprehensive nature than was originally contemplated. The Powers further hope that the Tariff Conference will be but the first step in a comprehensive revision of the treaties which they express their willingness to undertake at the earliest opportunity. The Powers are accordingly anxious to expedite the meeting of the Tariff Conference and to enter upon it with the desire to devise, in co-operation with the Chinese people, such modifications of the present tariff system as will correspond to present needs and will supply China with the necessary resources to stabilize her administrative system and will create those conditions of internal stability and international accord which are necessary conditions for the assumption by China of her proper place in the comity of Nations. The Powers are
