660 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX confidence in the President. He also appreciated the President’s candor and said he wished to analyze situation as he sees it. He then spoke along following lines: — (A) Just as President Carter does not want anything to harm Sadat and Egypt, he, Sadat, is concerned that nothing that happens damages President Carter’s position. This, Sadat thought, is especially important since, as he views situation, Begin is simply playing for time. Begin is against everything that was signed at Camp David. Begin was “forced” to sign CDAs against his desire and has ever since been seeking to undermine the CDAs. Begin first violated the December 17 target date and is now playing his “last card” in order to try to return the situation to a pre-Camp David configuration. At minimum it will be several months before Begin can be brought around to sign treaty. — (B) If we agree that joint US/Egyptian actions should not harm either President Carter or Egypt, Sadat viewed this as an important starting point. This should mean that our policies be identical. If this is agreed upon, Sadat thought it essential that a new, bold initiative be taken before the House, Senate, American and world public opinion in order to demonstrate who is genuinely interested in peace. Sadat said he could guarantee European support for such an initiative. He thought that the majority in the U.S. will also favor his position when it is fully explained. Time for confrontation (with Begin) has come. He did not wish to leave the initiative in Begin’s hands. Why should we appear to be defensive before House, Senate, American and world public opinion? Best defense, Sadat noted, is an offense. — (C) He had given Israel everything that is reasonable between equal parties. But he would not accept Israel as a “super power,” as Begin seems to be demanding. If we agree to Begin’s demands and views, he was sure that the Israeli PriMin will only ask for more. 5. Alluding to his comment that a new initiative is needed, Sadat outlined following scenario that he has in mind: — (A) He would ask me to tell the waiting press after our meeting that I had given him a preliminary report on the talks with Begin. Before commenting himself, he would want to get a full report on today’s session. He had asked me to meet with him again tomorrow morning in order to provide him with a full report. At that time he would also give me his responses. (I did so with press after our meeting.) — (B) After our meeting tomorrow, Monday,4 he plans to announce that he had talked with President Carter this evening and that he had received a follow-on report of the Begin talks. Here he noted parenthetically his hope that the message he will receive from Presi- 4 See footnote 2, Document 193.
