International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues 1099 Sub-Saharan Africa —The United States will cooperate more closely with other aidproviding countries and development institutions in dealing with the extraordinarily complex development tasks facing the governments of sub-Saharan Africa. This region provides some of the most complex development and coordination challenges that the world has faced. The number of donors and the difficulty of the problems requires that we work closely with the other countries and institutions that are determined to assist with the development of this very poor area. As a result of decisions already taken by you, we have begun the required consultative process. Very shortly, we will involve representatives of the recipient countries in planning a coordinated attack on their poverty problems. Human Rights —The United States will give preference in its assistance allocations to countries that respect human rights as fundamental for achieving equitable development. The United States must continue to lead in seeking equitable development that includes protection of human rights and the growth of democratic institutions. The United States has no long-term national interest in increasing the economic strength of countries with brutal repressive political systems. Our own institutions will flourish best in a world with a growing number of countries that allow their citizens to exercise human rights. It is, therefore, vital to the national interests of the United States to continue our efforts to protect the human rights of the citizens of the developing countries, and to encourage the creation and nurturing of democratic institutions that permit the participation of all of the people in questions involving political and economic power. We must lead the way in stressing the fundamental concept that the basic needs of a population are met best, not by the benevolent decisions of a dictator, but by political institutions that respond to the needs of the people when they are free to express themselves. Finding solutions to the extraordinarily complex problems inherent in equitable development requires a free and open society stimulating the most inventive and flexible approach to problem-solving. 4. Design a Development Strategy to Meet the Challenges of the 1980s Third Development Decade —The United States will participate actively and creatively in designing the global agenda for the Third Development Decade which is to
