International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
1099
Sub-Saharan Africa
—The United States will cooperate more closely with other aid-
providing countries and development institutions in dealing with the
extraordinarily complex development tasks facing the governments of
sub-Saharan Africa.
This region provides some of the most complex development and
coordination challenges that the world has faced. The number of
donors and the difficulty of the problems requires that we work closely
with the other countries and institutions that are determined to assist
with the development of this very poor area. As a result of decisions al-
ready taken by you, we have begun the required consultative process.
Very shortly, we will involve representatives of the recipient countries
in planning a coordinated attack on their poverty problems.
Human Rights
—The United States will give preference in its assistance alloca-
tions to countries that respect human rights as fundamental for
achieving equitable development.
The United States must continue to lead in seeking equitable de-
velopment that includes protection of human rights and the growth of
democratic institutions. The United States has no long-term national in-
terest in increasing the economic strength of countries with brutal re-
pressive political systems. Our own institutions will flourish best in a
world with a growing number of countries that allow their citizens to
exercise human rights.
It is, therefore, vital to the national interests of the United States to
continue our efforts to protect the human rights of the citizens of the
developing countries, and to encourage the creation and nurturing of
democratic institutions that permit the participation of all of the people
in questions involving political and economic power.
We must lead the way in stressing the fundamental concept that
the basic needs of a population are met best, not by the benevolent deci-
sions of a dictator, but by political institutions that respond to the needs
of the people when they are free to express themselves. Finding solu-
tions to the extraordinarily complex problems inherent in equitable de-
velopment requires a free and open society stimulating the most inven-
tive and flexible approach to problem-solving.
4. Design a Development Strategy to Meet the Challenges of the 1980s
Third Development Decade
—The United States will participate actively and creatively in de-
signing the global agenda for the Third Development Decade which is to
