394  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
Should not this survey likewise be completed and analyzed before 
Governor Hoegh’s new recommendation was adopted?
His further and final point, said Mr. Stans, was to suggest that some 
of the $5 million which had been allocated to the above-mentioned pro­
totype shelter program might also be used to provide for shelters in 
existing Federal buildings and thus serve a dual purpose of building 
prototypes and setting an example of shelters in Federal buildings. 
Accordingly, Mr. Stans recommended that action on Governor Hoegh’s 
recommendation be deferred for six months or a year until the results 
of the various surveys had come in.
The President expressed relief at being confronted with a figure 
of $5 million which was low in comparison with the estimated costs of 
some of the shelter programs which the Council had considered in the 
past. He added that he did not wish to argue the matter of the $5 million 
for Governor Hoegh’s recommendation and said that the two or three 
officials most concerned should meet with him in the next few days 
and decide how to act on this recommendation. On the other hand, he 
did not believe that those in charge of the shelter program should cease 
in their efforts to determine what it is best for the country to do in this 
field. We are, of course, now discounting the likelihood of a worldwide 
holocaust as a result of nuclear war. Nevertheless, we are also anx­
ious to give our people a feeling of confidence so we were on a kind of 
knife edge between providing some degree of confidence through the 
medium of a shelter program while at the same time not scaring our cit­
izens to death by too elaborate a program. It was not, said the President, 
that he felt he knew exactly what to do about it and he therefore wanted 
to ponder the problem before adding anything more.
The President also commented on the fact that we were trying to 
prevent the General Services Administration from building any more 
new Federal buildings.
Governor Hoegh agreed that this latter statement was correct and 
explained that it was because we were unlikely to have examples of 
shelters in newly built Federal buildings that made it seem important to 
him for the Federal Government to set an example through the means 
of providing shelter in modified existing Federal buildings.
Secretary Anderson expressed the opinion that it might be wise to 
select and concentrate on one example of shelter in an existing Federal 
building. We would thus be doing something by way of setting an exam­
ple for the people of the U.S. and would also in the course of so doing 
learn what is the best kind of shelter to build. Governor Hoegh replied 
to Secretary Anderson that the OCDM believed that we already knew 
pretty well what was needed in the way of building fall-­out shelters.
The President concluded the discussion by stating that we should 
wait a day or two and then make our decision.
