822
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
245.
Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance to
President Carter1
Washington, April 19, 1979
SUBJECT
Nuclear Cooperation Agreements with Egypt and Israel
We initialed identical nuclear cooperation agreements with Egypt
and Israel in August 1976.2 It was our intent at the time to submit these
agreements to Congress right away. President Ford, however, subse-
quently decided to withhold submission.
The agreements have remained in abeyance pending the Adminis-
tration’s review of our non-proliferation policy and passage of the new
non-proliferation law. Over this period we have assured the Egyptians,
who have continued to press us on concluding an agreement, that we
intended to do so as soon as practical.
Aside from the question of renegotiating our initialed agreements
to reflect the requirements of the new law, the Egyptian and Israeli
agreements have always been informally “linked” with a tacit under-
standing that they would be substantially identical and move forward
in tandem. Several developments have occurred, however, which make
such linkage doubtful.
For its part, Egypt appears ready to comply with the added non-
proliferation conditions specified in the Nuclear Non-proliferation Act
of 1978, but only so long as we guarantee it equal treatment with any
agreement subsequently concluded with Israel. Israel, on the other
hand, has not pushed us to conclude an agreement. Moreover, under
the law we would insist on safeguards being applied to all of Israel’s
existing nuclear facilities (including the unsafeguarded nuclear facility
at Dimona). The Israelis have resisted this in the past and will probably
continue to do so.
The Israelis remain interested in a nuclear cooperation agreement
and they might seek to have you waive the full-scope safeguards re-
1 Source: Carter Library, Brzezinski Donated Material, Subject File, Box 20, Alpha
Channel (Miscellaneous)—5/79–8/79. Secret. Carter initialed “C” at the top of the mem-
orandum, indicating that he saw the document. The memorandum was found attached
to a May 7 covering memorandum from Brzezinski to Vance, informing Vance of Carter’s
approval of the memorandum and instructing him that it should “be held very closely
and regarded as particularly sensitive.” (Ibid.)
2 On August 4–5, 1976, Egypt and Israel initialed identical agreements with the
United States to purchase atomic reactor plants which had been promised to both coun-
tries by President Nixon in June 1974. (“Egypt, Israel Agree to Buy Atomic Reactors From
U.S.,” The Washington Post, August 6, 1976, p. A8)
