for in the important regions of Central Africa to which the Revising
Convention applies.
It may appropriately be added that American commercial policy is based
upon the conception of equality of treatment. Assurance of equality of
treatment in the regions under consideration can be most efficaciously and
conveniently maintained by ratifying the Revising Convention. There is
reason to be apprehensive of discrimination, especially in colonial areas,
which may become involved in systems of intra-imperial preference, unless
a positive guarantee is maintained.
American exports of merchandise and American shipping entering the ports
of the territories in question alike demand the promise afforded by the
Revising Convention that they will not be discriminated against.
(2) The provisions of the Revising Convention include articles for the
purpose of assuring religious freedom and protection of religious, charitable
and scientific institutions. American missionary organizations, as well as
other institutions which are interested in developing a higher degree of
welfare in Central Africa, have left no doubt whatever of the importance
which they attach to this provision. It is deemed especially important that
American nationals representing these institutions in Africa shall have the
protection afforded by American participation in the Revising Convention.
(3) Under the terms of the Revising Convention, the parties thereto will
shortly reassemble for the purpose of considering whether a further revision
may be useful. While it is possible that the United States might participate
in a conference for that purpose without having ratified the Convention, the
natural and easy way of assuring such participation, and with it the
opportunity to re-affirm and perhaps to extend the American policy of the
Open Door, is to accept the Convention prior to the Conference.
(4) The Revising Convention forms an essential part of a group of
instruments relating primarily to Africa, but in some cases of general
application, in all of which it appears to be important that the United States
become a participant. One of these, a Convention for the Supervision of the
International Trade in Arms and Ammunition and in Implements of War,
signed at Geneva on June 17, 1925,61 was transmitted by you to the Senate
