3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
596
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
hope that the United States and England will change their inflexible ap-
proach, in particular, to questions of verification. If that were done, all
three partners could jointly and without further delay finalize their
agreement on this important and necessary measure.
Brezhnev turned to the negotiations on reduction of armed forces
and armaments in Central Europe. Together with its allies the USSR
had made many efforts to reach an agreement that would be fair and
equitable to all. President Carter, himself, and other leaders in Western
Europe had noted the constructive nature of the Soviet proposal tabled
in June 1978. Nonetheless, the negotiations are still marking time. Quite
recently in Washington, the Soviet side had set forth its considerations
on how to move things forward in this field by proposing that our two
countries reduce their forces and armaments in Central Europe by way
of a first step, without thereby prejudicing the fundamental positions of
the sides at the Vienna negotiations, and for the time being, to leave
aside everything that has been slowing down these negotiations. Un-
fortunately, in response, the Eastern countries had heard only the very
same unacceptable demands on which the West had insisted all along
at the Vienna talks. Brezhnev expressed the hope that this had not been
the last word of the US side. If the United States was willing to reach
agreement, the Soviet Union could take some very substantive steps in
the context of the reduction of the level of forces in the first phase.
Brezhnev asked Foreign Minister Gromyko to comment on this subject.
Gromyko noted that Brezhnev had already drawn attention to the
importance of this matter and to the difficulties the Soviet side had
come up against in Vienna. If one tried to get to the bottom of the com-
plications besetting the talks, one would have to note that the Soviet
Union was being told that it and its allies have a certain number of
forces, and actual figures have been named. However, the figures cited
exceeded by more than 150,000 the real strength of our armed forces
and that of our allies. Gromyko repeated and stressed the figure
150,000. He pointed out that the East had said that it did not have those
150,000 troops, so how could it admit to their existence? Then, the East
was told that if it did not recognize that number, it will be impossible to
reach an understanding on the other matters being discussed in
Vienna. The President interjected, “how do you suggest we reconcile
this issue?” Gromyko continued by saying, when the East asked where
that 150,000 figure came from, it received no answer. He could only
conclude that the West had unreliable sources.
Gromyko said that in order to move these negotiations forward, the
Soviets had recently made a second proposal. That proposal was a re-
sponse to the questions the West had asked. The Soviet Union had sug-
gested to circumvent the difficulties that had arisen at the negotiations
by reaching a first understanding concerning the armed forces and ar-
