96 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI is ready to commit itself to deployment of defenses. Consequently, one objective of DST is to preserve the right to pursue SDI within the ABM Treaty. In this context, there are two views regarding the legal rights which DST should preserve during the nonwithdrawal period. (S) Preserve Broad Interpretation—One view holds that it will continue to be in the interest of the United States to preserve its full legal rights under the ABM Treaty (broad interpretation) and to resist any Soviet efforts to impose a more restrictive legal obligation. This will enable the SDI program to maximize the foundation of technical information upon which development and deployment decisions will be based. Were the United States to agree to a more restrictive legal obligation, such as the narrow interpretation, it would not be able to conduct the system integration tests necessary to support a fully informed deployment decision in the mid-1990s. With the increased SDI program emphasis on Brilliant Pebbles, it is possible that the narrow interpretation also would adversely affect testing planned for the early 1990s. Under these circumstances the U.S. would be forced either to: a) make a decision on deployment before all testing necessary to establish high confidence in the feasibility of an effective defense has been conducted; or b) withdraw from the ABM Treaty in order to complete the testing prior to making a decision on deployment. (S) Further, the Soviets have attempted to impose an even more restrictive legal obligation than the narrow interpretation. They have suggested in DST that the sides agree either to “strictly abide by the ABM Treaty,” without defining what that means, or agree to a list of permitted and prohibited space-­testing activities which specifies precise technical limits to the testing of certain devices. While the Soviets appear to have distanced themselves somewhat from the “list” approach, it does give some insight into what they mean when they demand that the sides “strictly abide by the ABM Treaty.” Besides being largely unverifiable, in many cases the permitted performance parameters of devices identified in the “list” proposal are more restrictive than the narrow interpretation and would prohibit even some space-­based tests which the United States plans to conduct under the narrow interpretation. (S) Narrow Interpretation May Be Sufficient—The other view agrees that the broad interpretation is fully justified from a legal standpoint, but questions the premise that a DST regime that does not implement the broad interpretation during the nonwithdrawal period would seriously undermine the ability of the United States to establish a sufficient degree of technical confidence in defense to support a fully informed decision in the mid-1990s on whether to deploy defenses. The real issue is what level of confidence in defense system feasibility prior to a deployment decision would be acceptable programmatically and
