972
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
the parties (although we would share more details with Waldheim and
one or two of his closest associates, because of their central role). To go
into details, for example with the Israelis, could lead to an insistence
that the details of the last stage of the plan be agreed upon before the
first step is taken.
Our strategy would involve tailoring our initial presentation to the
role which we foresee each party playing in the process and to antici-
pate—and thus to avoid—some of the difficulties which particular
parties will have with certain aspects of the plan. As we proceed, we
would retain the flexibility to refine or change some of the later steps
we envisage.
THE ISSUES
Because there are so many actors, we have had to consider a
number of issues that will arise in the implementation of this plan:
1. Management. We have reviewed various possibilities for the
management of this program and have concluded that the U.S. will
have to provide the motor to keep this effort going but will need to
work in an almost co-manager relationship with the UN Secretary Gen-
eral. Ambassador Dean can well handle the U.S. role in Beirut. An im-
portant element in the UN’s ability to play its role will be its ability to
field a personality who can be a focal point for the negotiations among
the parties in Lebanon. Both of us, of course, will work closely with the
Lebanese President and Prime Minister.
It may prove useful at some point for Waldheim to send a special
representative to the area for this purpose. We, the Lebanese, and the
Arabs generally have supported Waldheim naming the just-retired UK
Ambassador in New York, Ivor Richard, to this position. Neither the
Soviets (because Richard is from a NATO country) nor the Israelis have
been keen on the idea. If the Richard appointment does not materialize,
we may be able to make use of an excellent Pakistani, Ambassador Ak-
hund, who is now about to arrive in Beirut to coordinate UN develop-
ment and reconstruction programs in Lebanon.
2. Parties Involved. Within Lebanon and in support of this plan we
will need to marshal the support of the following parties:
—Secretary General Waldheim and the UN Secretariat generally.
(We will resume consultations with them after you have agreed to this
general approach.)
—Israel. (In both Washington and Tel Aviv, we would fill them in
at an early stage on the broad outlines of our proposal, urge their coop-
eration, and promise to keep them informed of progress.)
—The Lebanese Government. (The U.S. and UN would jointly put
forward a proposed course of action.)
—The PLO. (We would seek their cooperation through third
parties primarily, but the UN would carry the major burden.)
