1957  1311
26. I asked who had proposed we unconditonally refuse to resort 
threat or use force resolve issues between us? Who is it thus far refused 
do this?
27. Wang pointed out American occupation Taiwan was one such 
condition and American insistence right self defense in Taiwan area 
another such condition.
28. I stated unconditionally means we unconditonally say we will 
not go war about these problems but will seek their peaceful solution.
29. Wang said there was more to “unconditional” than that. If US 
ready accept their draft US would thereby prove sincerity.
30. I answered that his proposals did not constitute unconditional 
renunciation force. I had been in past and remained willing consider 
any proposals which did accomplish this. Not willing consider propos­
als which gave appearance doing so but in fact avoided doing so. Not 
willing accept proposals which mean one thing one side and another 
thing to other side. Particularly not willing do so after our experience 
with agreement on civilians.
31. Wang insisted had dealt with all these problems in past and did 
not like my “new” opinion in this regard this morning.
32. I suggested next meeting Thursday, February 7. Wang preferred 
February 14. I agreed.
Gowen
779.	 Letter 53 from Johnson to McConaughy1
Letter No. 53
Geneva, January 19, 1957
Dear Walter:
Back from the 64th. As I implied in my summary it was a dreary 
affair. Today he seemed to be saying that he was willing to sit there 
just as many months as I was but I should not believe he was going 
to make any further moves and I said the same back to him. So there 
we are. It is not a cheerful prospect. As a footnote, if I did not seem too 
brilliant at the end it was because my mouth was hurting from a tooth 
I had to have pulled late yesterday evening which, together with other 
facts of nature, made me desperate to get out of there.
1 Source: Department of State, Geneva Talks Files, Lot 72D415. Secret; Official–­
Informal. Johnson signed the original “Alex.”
