1955  481
into comparison with Wang’s draft which is ostensibly simple and 
direct.
While you have already mentioned the point (in your 1056) that 
the UN Charter does comprehend domestic matters if they affect 
international peace and security, I think we must be extremely careful 
in our draft not to give the PRC the slightest peg on which to hang the 
argument that the renunciation of force applies only to international 
matters. You have noted, I am sure, that the UN Charter provisions 
quoted by Wang are designed to place this problem on an interna­
tional plane. For this reason I would prefer relating the renunciation 
of force to the Taiwan area rather than to a renunciation between the 
two parties.
Paragraph 3 of your draft is difficult to understand and would seem 
to give a good ground for argument that Taiwan is entirely excluded 
and hence that force could be used against it with impunity.
In paragraph 4 the phrase “if it constitutes a threat, etc.” raises the 
question, who decides? And what about domestic affairs if they should 
constitute a threat to peace?
Paragraph 5 seems to limit the declaration to the two parties 
and again seems not to preclude the use of force against the GRC. 
In paragraph 6 the clause “when this would threaten international 
peace” seems to provide an escape clause in the Taiwan situation. 
Paragraph 6 also appears to be inconsistent and in conflict with para­
graphs 2 and 5.
Entirely informally and without the slightest pride of authorship, 
I am sending along a draft which incorporates my views as to a possible 
“Agreed Announcement”. If you think the approach of this draft has 
merit, you might wish to discuss it with Herman Phleger and possibly 
the Secretary. Alternatively, it may be that some of the language of this 
draft could be used to overcome some of the apparent objections men­
tioned above.
This letter is written in a great rush and late in the day, so I hope 
you will pardon any shortcomings.
With all best wishes,
Sincerely yours,
William J. Sebald
Enclosure:
Draft Agreed Announcement (3 copies)
