272
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Package energy options together and link to balance of payments
(Blumenthal)
Proceed to implement options, but do not expressly link to balance of
payments (Schultze, Vance, Eizenstat)16
16 Carter did not indicate his preference with respect to these options. At the end of
the memorandum he wrote: “Statement approved for use when/if needed. JC.”
86.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for Domestic
Affairs and Policy (Eizenstat) to President Carter1
Washington, December 20, 1977
SUBJECT
Proposed Statement For Release Tomorrow
Attached is a draft of the proposed statement to be issued under
your name on the balance of trade and payments issue.2 I have had it
reviewed by Henry Owen on Zbig’s staff, by Schlesinger’s staff, and
copies have been provided to Charlie Schultze and Dick Cooper. I will
attempt to get their comments in the morning; they were unavailable at
any time tonight.
As a result of the meeting this evening with Dr. Burns, Secretary
Blumenthal, Charlie Schultze, Dick Cooper, Tony Solomon and others,3
both Charlie and Dick Cooper are now apparently convinced that a
statement along these lines should be issued. As you are aware from
the memorandum which I forwarded to you earlier4 that this was not
their previous position.
While the Department of Energy does not appear to be enthusiastic
about such a statement, since it effectively announces new energy
1 Source: Carter Library, Records of the Office of the Staff Secretary, Presidential
File, Box 65, 12/21/77 [2]. No classification marking. A stamped notation reads: “The
President has seen,” and Carter wrote at the top of the page: “Stu—OK only after
Schultze & McIntyre have ok’ed it. Clear any significant changes with me. J.C.”
2 Attached but not printed. For the text of the December 21 statement on the U.S.
balance of trade and payments announcing measures to improve the U.S. trade position,
see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Jimmy Carter, 1977, Book II,
pp. 2159–2160.
3 No other record of this meeting was found.
4 See Document 85.
