Eastern Europe Region
153
and slug any replies Stadis—EUR only. Please do not refer to it in
other communications.
Begin text:
—It was easy to rationalize our decision last January not to impose
sanctions against the Warsaw Pact countries of Eastern Europe for the
Soviet invasion of Afghanistan.2 Furthermore, the policy of differentia-
tion which we enunciated at the time worked—the countries of Eastern
Europe clung eagerly to their relations with the US and Western Europe
despite public and private Soviet complaints that we were trying to
divide them from their allies. The policy which we have pursued over
several administrations has encouraged diversity and evolutionary
change in Eastern Europe. In fact, it has contributed to the independ-
ence in foreign policy which has created such problems for Moscow
in Romania respectively, and to the domestic pluralism in Poland and
the economic reform in Hungary which have already brought those
countries some way back toward Western models.
—We should not lose sight of the fact that the economic and politi-
cal forces which brought about the situation in Poland are also at work
in the rest of Eastern Europe. The very fact that the East Germans, for
example, are so afraid of Western influence and presence should point
us in the direction of getting more involved in Moscow’s back yard—
discreetly, but in concrete ways—rather than reducing our ties and
influence. Our objective should be to divide the East, not drive it
together by intentionally apportioning more blame to the raped than
the rapist, as we have been accused of doing with Czechoslovakia after
the 1968 invasion.
—Yet we should be under no illusion that it would be possible to
continue our policy without change in the wake of a Soviet-sponsored
Warsaw Pact intervention in Poland. In the first place, some of the
Warsaw Pact countries would no doubt participate in an intervention in
Poland, thus distinguishing this from the case of Afghanistan. Secondly,
both Soviet pressures and the grave deterioration in East-West relations
in the wake of a Polish intervention would create new divisions in
Europe and limit Eastern European freedom of action. Thirdly, public
opinion here and in Western Europe would demand some actions
against a Polish Government which suppressed the independent trade
unions by force or East European Governments which participated in
an intervention in Poland. US unions, for example, would no doubt
take matters in their own hands and refuse to handle Polish ships
and aircraft.
2 See footnote 5, Document 39.
