January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981 1315 —Hope that the Israeli public will rally around him in the face of expected international criticism, and that his domestic popularity and political support will be strengthened. Very likely a further consideration is that Begin sees the next few weeks as a period when it will be difficult for the Administration to react firmly. Considerations Begin’s moving his office to East Jerusalem will put our credibility on the line in a way that few other actions could at this time. We are publicly committed to the position that we do not recognize Israel’s annexation of East Jerusalem and that we do not accept unilateral actions concerning Jerusalem by any of the parties. Our response will have to make clear that we continue to hold firmly to that position. Even then we can expect a very sharp response from the Arab bloc supported more broadly by non-Arab Islamic states, with demands that we force Begin to back off. If our response is merely one of verbal disapproval, with no action to back it up, it will be seen by the Arabs as U.S. acquiescence. We can expect that the Arabs will immediately call a Security Council meeting and put forward a resolution condemning Israel’s action. If we are seen to be wavering on our long established position on Jerusalem, reactions from the Arab side could be damaging. The Saudis would be particularly upset by a feeble U.S. response. Because of his close association with us, Sadat could be seriously hurt were we to fail to make clear our opposition to Begin’s move, and he might feel obliged to take some action to put a distance between himself and us. We expect Sadat would in any case withdraw his Ambassador from Israel, but if he felt our response were feeble he might go further and break off diplomatic relations with Israel entirely or again suspend the autonomy negotiations. In any event, it is important that Sadat and we ourselves not take totally different tacks in reacting to Begin’s move. When we decide what we intend to do, we should have Ambassador Atherton consult with Sadat to sound out his views. At the same time we want to avoid being carried beyond our previous positions into statements or actions which would be interpreted by the Israelis and their supporters in this country as denying even Israel’s right to be in West Jerusalem, somehow implying that we intend to divide the city again, or threatening a cutoff of U.S. military or economic assistance. We are faced with the probability that they will interpret any opposition at all as evidence of one of these positions. Options and Proposed Action Within these limits there are essentially two steps we can consider:
