38
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
also briefed him in detail about these developments and our perception
of their wider repercussions in our own region and beyond. Ambassa-
dor Hummel, no doubt, has communicated to you our views which I
hope have been of some interest.
Neither are the facts of the latest turn of events in Afghanistan
obscure nor is their interpretation a difficult exercise. The leftist coup
in Kabul has replaced a 200-year old monarchic tradition in Afghanistan
with a communist-oriented, if not communist, Government which was
immediately recognised by the Soviet Union and has its full backing.
India joined Bulgaria, the most subservient Soviet satellite of Eastern
Europe, to follow the Soviet lead without any hesitation or delay what-
soever. The collapse of Daoud’s regime with which we were making
good progress towards a settlement of our differences, may have been
welcomed in New Delhi. India is allied to the Soviet Union under the
Treaty of Friendship and Cooperation of 1971 and acts in tandem with
it, at critical moments, despite the illusion of a shift in its policies.3
The facts of how the coup was engineered are not in dispute. Soviet
trained pilots in Soviet supplied MIGs and Soviet trained officers in
Soviet supplied tanks joined together to wipe out President Daoud and
his family, in a swift and bloody operation, closely following the pattern
of events in Addis Ababa not long ago.4 The Afghan Police Force which
was exclusively West German trained, was also eliminated.
The Khalq party which has formed the new Government is com-
posed of leftists known to have been closely associated with the Soviet
Union and the Central Committee of the Soviet Communist Party over
a period of many years. President Taraki also served for a while in the
Afghan Embassy in Washington where his denunciation of the Afghan
ruling family resulted in his removal from office.5 He is now not only
President of Afghanistan but also the head of the Khalq Party with
which an extremist faction called Parcham merged in October 1977.
3 The Indo-Soviet Treaty of Peace, Friendship, and Cooperation was signed in New
Delhi on August 7, 1971.
4 A possible reference to the Ethiopian revolution of 1974, during which Marxist
military leaders brought down Emperor Haile Selassie. See Foreign Relations, 1969–1976,
vol. E–8, Documents on Africa, 1973–1976, Document 122. However, the more likely
reference is to the assassination of Teferi Bante, Chairman of the Provisional Military
Administrative Council (PMAC), along with five other leaders of PMAC on February
3, 1977. The assassination of Teferi Bante and his associates, all enemies of Mengistu
Haile-Mariam, cemented Mengistu’s role as leader of the Ethiopian revolution.
5 In telegram 3372 from Kabul, April 30, the Embassy noted that Taraki served as
the press attaché in the Afghan Embassy in Washington, 1952–1953. In telegram 4262
from Islamabad, May 1, the Embassy reported that Taraki made “anti-monarchist
speeches” during his tenure in Washington and consequently requested asylum in the
United States, which was turned down after “intense pressure” from King Zahir Shah.
Taraki subsequently returned to Kabul where he was arrested. (National Archives, RG
59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780185–0099 and D780185–0561, respectively)
