1482  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
394.	 Telegram Supnu 78 From Geneva1
Geneva, November 21, 1958, 11 a.m.
Supnu 78. Following is suggested draft referred to Supnu 77.
The negotiations at Geneva for a discontinuance of nuclear weap­
ons tests are not making progress. The principal obstacle appears to be 
Soviet unwillingness to discuss, let alone accept, an effective system of 
controls to assure that an obligation to stop tests is honored. The Sovi­
ets claim that they cannot discuss controls until they have an agreed 
understanding on an obligation to cease tests. The United States and 
United Kingdom delegations have repeatedly made clear that as far as 
their governments are concerned the essential requirement to ensure a 
lasting agreement to cease tests is an effective system of controls. The 
Governments of the United States and United Kingdom believe that, 
if the Soviets will cooperate fully in establishing and operating such 
a system, an agreement to stop nuclear weapons tests will surely last. 
Moreover, they believe that the changed attitude toward controls which 
such Soviet cooperation would signify would remove the greatest sin­
gle obstacle to progress in agreeing on and implementing measures of 
real disarmament. Therefore, to make their position crystal clear and 
to assist the negotiations, President Eisenhower and Prime Minister 
Macmillan have decided to make the following joint declaration: “The 
Governments of the United States and the United Kingdom will agree 
to stop nuclear weapons tests once and for all, provided only that an 
effective international system of control is agreed, comes into operation 
by agreed stages, and operates satisfactorily in accordance with agreed 
standards.”
The President and Prime Minister hope that the Soviet Union will 
accede to this declaration and will instruct its representatives in Geneva 
to proceed promptly, together with the delegations of the United States 
and United Kingdom, to negotiate and sign an agreement to stop tests 
that has proper provisions for effective international control.
Villard
1 Source: Proposed U.S.–U.K. public statement. Secret; Niact; Limited Distribution. 
2 pp. NARA, RG 59, Central Files, 700.5611/11–2158.
