Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX also play an important role during a period of political transition, when uncertainty and change are in the air. Generally, however, anonymous dissent has little impact, if only because there is a tendency among the population to view it as a possible police provocation. (U) There has thus far been little active cooperation and almost no advance coordination among dissidents in different East European countries. The few known instances of such contacts across national boundaries have usually been instigated by Polish dissidents. [less than 1 line not declassified] group has periodic contacts with dissidents in the USSR.8 The most brazen and ambitious effort at cooperation occurred in August 1978, when Polish and Czechoslovak dissidents met in southern Poland to discuss possible joint actions and then issued a communique.9 [classification not declassified] Nonetheless, many dissidents see disadvantages in such personal contact. It is difficult to arrange, and may expose dissidents to serious legal charges, such as conspiracy. Any attempt at coordinated actions across national boundaries would arouse deep suspicion in Moscow and induce Soviet pressure on the East Europeans to crack down. Existing evidence that dissidents respond to or imitate the activities of dissidents elsewhere in the region most often indicates only that they are well informed of each others’ activities by Western media broad- Impact of Dissent The dissidents have not altered in any fundamental way the East European regimes’ style of rule, nor have they induced the governments to adopt more conciliatory domestic policies. If anything, there has been a shift—slight in Poland, pronounced in Czechoslovakia—toward tougher internal controls. Indeed, the dissidents seem to have brought upon themselves varying degrees of harassment and repression. Nor has dissidence helped generate serious political discord within the party leadership that could provide the vehicle for political change.10 [classification not declassified] Nonetheless, the mere existence of dissidence has been an embarrassment to regimes that insist on making a show of unanimous popular support and try to conceal the repressive features of their system. At 8 An unknown hand highlighted this sentence in the left-hand margin. 9 The Poles apparently consider this as the first in a series of cooperative efforts. They have also been trying to encourage Hungarian dissident intellectuals to become outspoken and to use samizdat publications to express their views. [Footnote is in the original.] 10 An unknown hand underlined this sentence and wrote “1” in the left-hand margin next to it. The “1” corresponds to a handwritten note at the bottom of the page that reads “ANALYSIS.”
