650
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
achieving an Egyptian-Israeli peace treaty. It was realized that the
Egyptian-Israeli agreement was a first step. It is obvious to you and to
me that we missed the three-month goal and the prospects are not good
now. Sadat originally wanted a fixed goal for the establishment of the
self-government before withdrawal had been carried out in Sinai. Now
he will accept a target date. In his message24 to you when he raised the
question of Gaza first, he said that if the Palestinians or others refused
to participate, Israel would not be held responsible. There has to be
some element of good faith on both sides. We cannot envisage every
possibility for abrogation of the peace treaty. Sadat feels that he made
major concessions on the question of setting a goal. He won’t hold Is-
rael responsible if others fail to participate. You have apparently dis-
counted Sadat’s message and are afraid that he will use the idea of a
target date as an excuse to break the peace treaty. I don’t believe that
Sadat wants that.
Prime Minister Begin: I remember President Sadat’s letter. I sent
you a copy of my reply.25 We have had experience. We decided on a
target date for the treaty negotiations at Camp David. When that date
passed, Israel was then blamed for the failure. The target date was not
met. The Egyptians blamed us, and not only the Egyptians. Israel
should not be in a position to have to justify herself. Israel is blamed
even though Israel was ready to sign the treaty. But this is not the only
issue. The target date will be a stumbling block to the autonomy. Don’t
forget the PLO and their Kalashnikovs and their ability to intimidate
the population. We cannot guard everyone. The PLO is a reality in
Judea and Samaria. They will not let autonomy be introduced. If we set
a target date, it will be dangerous. I contend that we should take the
Camp David Agreement as it is. There were three parts to the Camp
David Agreement: an Egypt-Israel Treaty; autonomy for Judea and Sa-
maria; and an invitation to others to join the negotiations. We should
follow the same sequence. There should be a treaty, then autonomy,
then an invitation to others. There should be no target date, and we
should simply say “as expeditiously as possible.”
President Carter: Do you see any interrelationship among these
three elements?
Prime Minister Begin: That is a very dangerous phrase. At Camp
David we heard this phrase of interrelationship, but we also heard the
word “unconditional,” and then it was all right. But it is very character-
istic, and I told this to my colleagues, that the word interrelationship
would remain, but we would hear no more of the question of uncondi-
tionality. That is a fact. If we can say that there is an interrelationship
24 See Document 146.
25 See Document 150.
