1176
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Prime Minister Begin said he had never heard this from Egypt.
Minister Burg said that Ambassador Linowitz is partly right. They
had talked about 1) transferred powers; 2) shared (like water) or coor-
dinated powers; and 3) residual powers (like internal and external se-
curity) for Israel. Israel agreed on this. But Khalil got cold feet, and said
that he can’t agree on residual powers for Israel. His need is to see them
all transferred. Israel says that what is security is Israel’s.
The President said that he is not sure about the definition of internal
security, but the rest is all right.
Minister Burg said that three categories . . .
The President said that with Ambassador Linowitz, Minister Burg
had used the term “reserved.”
Minister Burg agreed.
Ambassador Linowitz said that we are not very far apart. We pro-
posed that there be a list of transferred powers; and some for Israel, like
security and foreign affairs (if anybody has the latter). This we agree
on. And there should be a Continuing Committee to deal with a middle
group—like water, internal security, maybe land. Why is there a
problem? He thinks there is a misconception, from talks with Minister
Burg, about the Continuing Committee. The idea is that there should be
an agreed list of powers to go to the Self-Governing Authority. The
Self-Governing Authority would then be chosen by the residents of the
West Bank and Gaza. It would be understood that some powers—e.g.
Israel’s security—would go to Israel. The Continuing Committee
would be set up—and Egypt says that the U.S. should be in—and it
would take issues like water, economic arrangements, and maybe land.
It would reach decisions on a unanimous basis, and if there were no
agreement, then existing arrangements would continue.
Prime Minister Begin said he would come to the concept of the Con-
tinuing Committee—in the seven points9 (the U.S. had shared with Is-
rael)—later. The issue of greatest important is security. First, the
Self-Governing Authority is an administrative council—not within the
spirit but within the letter of Camp David. They had weighed every
word for 13 days and nights. Second, the number of members (of the
SGA) should be equal to the number of functions. The U.S. and Egypt
should think this over. Israel stands by it. It is in accord with the Camp
David Accords. On the seven points, he wants to quote one: “It is
agreed that Israel will have sole authority to exercise the power of ex-
ternal defense and foreign affairs.” This says “defense” instead of “se-
curity”—why? It is narrower. “Defense” refers to attack; and then Is-
rael will defend itself. “Security” is another problem. There are Israel’s
9 See footnote 3, Document 354.
