The Customs Attaché will simultaneously call upon the firm in question and request
facilities for making the necessary investigation. In case the firm refuses to permit the
Attaché to carry out such an investigation, the latter will inform the Chief of the
American Diplomatic Mission, who, in turn, will take up the question with the
government, pointing out again the purpose for which the investigation is to be made,
and that exclusion from the United States of the firm’s goods under Section 510 may
result as a consequence of the refusal.
In the event that representations to the foreign government do not result in overcoming
any firm’s objections to the investigation by the Customs Attaché, it will not be
attempted further and the Customs Attaché will refer the case back to the American
Customs authorities with an appropriate notation of the refusal.
It is believed that no fixed procedure can advantageously be outlined by the
Department for the guidance of American diplomatic missions in bringing such
requests to the notice of foreign governments. It would appear that in each country
there might be worked out by the Mission and the appropriate foreign government a
procedure that would satisfy the requirements of that government without necessitating
the active intervention of the Mission in each individual case. It is left to the discretion
of the individual Chiefs of Mission, after consultation with the Customs Attaché, and to
the exigencies of situations in particular countries to determine the procedure to be
followed. It is the Department’s object to ensure that no investigation into the cost of
production will be undertaken by Customs Attachés of the Treasury without the prior
general permission of the foreign government concerned, and, in certain countries
where the activities of Customs Attachés have been or may be questioned by the
governments thereof, without prior notification to the foreign government of each
specific cost of production investigation.
The general plan outlined above, providing for notification to the foreign government
of each cost-of-production investigation that it is planned to undertake, is subject to
modification or suppression by the Chief of the Diplomatic Mission, in his discretion,
in those countries where the Customs Attachés’ activities have not been questioned. In
such countries, it may appear to the Chief of Mission not to be desirable to raise any
question in the minds of the authorities of the country to which he is accredited. Under
these circumstances, no action in regard to this instruction need be taken, aside from
the general notification of the status and duties of the Customs Attachés, unless some
subsequent question as to their activities is raised by the government.
It is fully realized that there may be objection on the part of certain foreign
governments and by certain foreign manufacturers to disclosing one or another element
of the cost-of-production investigation. For instance, it has been felt by foreign
manufacturers that valuable trade secrets were being requested by Customs Attachés
which, if they became known to the competitors of the firm, might well prove
