480
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
weapons. Because of the President’s technical knowledge of the nuclear
problem no Chief of State had a better appreciation of the full signifi-
cance of the nuclear threat. I pointed out that Averell Harriman and
Marshall Shulman typified the kind of advisers that the President had
on Soviet-American relations, and emphasized that Secretary Vance
had long since been known for his constructive, moderate approach
to East-West relations. I suggested that if he hadn’t already done so,
Kadar should read the President’s Charleston speech6 to get a realistic
exposure to the President’s views on world affairs. He said he was
familiar with it.
12. In regard to MFN, I emphasized that the Executive Branch of
the government was in favor of granting it to Hungary, but we had
to meet the requirements of the 1974 Trade Act.7 We thought that this
could be done to the mutual advantage of both countries without
adversely affecting either nation’s self-esteem. As Kadar undoubtedly
knew, we had made our first proposal for meeting the political require-
ments of the act and we were waiting for the GOH’s response. We
hoped we could solve the political aspects of the matter fairly soon so
that we could proceed to negotiate a trade agreement. To my surprise,
he asked whether MFN was linked with the Crown. I made it clear
that there was no linkage. (Comment: I am puzzled by this question,
but perhaps it results from the fact that when we told Foreign Minister
Puja about the President’s decision to return the Crown we also made
our first proposal about MFN. Budapest 3749).8
13. I also commented on the importance of extending our bilateral
contacts. We were pleased with the cooperation between members of
our Embassy and officials of the Foreign Office and other government
departments. We would now like to develop similar relationships
with members of the Party. When Senators McGovern and Biden and
Counselor Nimetz were here they had a chance to talk with Mr. Gyenes
and Mr. Berecz, top Party officers, and this had proved very useful.
In fact, we had invited Mr. Berecz to visit the United States and we
hoped that he would be able to accept.
14. We also desired to increase our contacts between the private
individuals of our two countries and between organizations, particu-
larly in the fields of education, science and technology and culture.
I saw no reason why our exchanges should not be on a scale similar
6 Reference is to President Carter’s speech on U.S.-Soviet relations at the annual
meeting of the Southern Legislative Conference in Charleston, South Carolina, July 21.
For the text of the speech, see Public Papers: Carter, 1977, Book II, pp. 1309–1315.
7 See Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol. XXXI, Foreign Economic Policy, 1973–1976,
Document 223.
8 See Document 149 and footnote 3 thereto.
