Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
307
“Security also comes through the strength of our alliances. We
have reconfirmed our commitment to the defense of Europe, and this
year we will demonstrate that commitment by further modernizing
and strengthening our military capabilities there.
“Security can also be enhanced by agreements with potential ad-
versaries which reduce the threat of nuclear disaster while maintaining
our own relative strategic capability.
“In areas of peaceful competition with the Soviet Union, we will
continue to more than hold our own.
“At the same time, we are negotiating with quiet confidence,
without haste, with careful determination, to ease the tensions between
us and to ensure greater stability and security.
“The strategic arms limitation talks have been long and difficult.
We want a mutual limit on both the quality and the quantity of the
giant nuclear arsenals of both nations, and then we want actual reduc-
tions in strategic arms as a major step toward the ultimate elimination
of nuclear weapons from the face of the Earth.
“If these talks result in an agreement this year—and I trust they
will—I pledge to you that the agreement will maintain and enhance the
stability of the world’s strategic balance and the security of the United
States.
“For 30 years, concerted but unsuccessful efforts have been made
to ban the testing of atomic explosives—both military weapons and
peaceful nuclear devices.
“We are hard at work with Great Britain and the Soviet Union on
an agreement which will stop testing and will protect our national se-
curity and provide for adequate verification of compliance. We are now
making, I believe, good progress toward this comprehensive ban on
nuclear explosions.
“We are also working vigorously to halt the proliferation of nu-
clear weapons among the nations of the world which do not now have
them and to reduce the deadly global traffic in conventional arms sales.
Our stand for peace is suspect if we are also the principal arms mer-
chant of the world. So, we’ve decided to cut down our arms transfers
abroad on a year-by-year basis and to work with other major arms ex-
porters to encourage their similar constraint.
“Every American has a stake in our second major goal—a world at
peace. In a nuclear age, each of us is threatened when peace is not se-
cured everywhere. We are trying to promote harmony in those parts of
the world where major differences exist among other nations and
threaten international peace.
“In the Middle East, we are contributing our good offices to main-
tain the momentum of the current negotiations and to keep open the
