244 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Fahd continued another point is that the Palestinians living outside the West Bank and Gaza think that the agreements are keeping them out of the process. This is disturbing because they are likely to be the primary makers of trouble. Also, self rule may not be fruitful if Palestinians in the area hesitate to come forward to participate in it in deference to those Palestinians outside the area. The Secretary said that with respect to those Palestinians outside the area there is provision for the return of those displaced in 1967 and the sketching of guidelines to achieve prompt, just and permanent implementation of the refugee problem. Fahd said once the Palestinians outside realize that they have the choice of returning and participating in the administration and determining the future of the area, all would be well. If that is not clear he felt that things would not go well. He asked whether President Carter has in mind that after five years Israel will withdraw totally leaving the Palestinians free to determine their own lives. The Secretary said that the answer is yes, with the proviso that if necessary to protect Israel’s security, Israel could have specified limited areas in which limited numbers of military forces could be placed for defense. Fahd said he would like to pursue this. Israeli security points will not be effective but will only agitate the Palestinian population. Why should they be in Palestinian territory? Why not in Israeli territory? The Palestinians will not feel free if they are in Palestinian territory. The Secretary replied that after five years Israel and Jordan and Israel and Egypt will have negotiated treaties. There is no security problem there. The Israelis, however, fear Iraq. Fahd asked where the Iraqis would come from, through Saudi Arabia, or across Syria? He assured the Secretary the Iraqis would not interfere with Israel’s security. The Secretary replied that is the Israelis’ concern. Fahd said that it is his deep conviction that in its heart Israel is confident it is here to stay. The security concern is a fabrication. Real Israeli security lies in support by the United States and peace with the Arab states and in the willingness of the Palestinian people to live in peace. The Secretary said he agreed with this. In five years as the situation develops, the Israelis may come to feel that the security points are not needed. He wanted to make clear that we are talking possibilities. The agreement does not specify arrangements after five years. It simply says there should be provision for security but does not specify. Fahd stressed the importance of the psychological element that the Palestinians realize that they will be free after five years and that those outside the area will be free to return. If they realize this all problems will cease. He urged the United States not to lose sight of this.
