December 17, 1978–March 26, 1979
711
and Hebron, you can find ex-ministers of the Jordanian Government. If
Hussein comes in, he will work with the Jordanians and the Pales-
tinians. They are already there, people like Anwar Nuseibeh. If you
replace Jordan with Egypt, Khalil will say that he wants to send Egyp-
tians, and we will say no sir. We agreed that in Gaza, after the au-
tonomy, there would be some Egyptian liaison. They would not neces-
sarily be in Gaza. We only agreed to Jordan and the police force, and to
joint Israeli-Jordanian patrols. The Egyptians can’t do this. We have a
special relationship with Jordan. It is bad to divide Judea and Samaria
from Jordan. They are the same families. I would object to introducing
Egypt to replace Jordan. At Camp David, we assumed that King Hus-
sein would like Sadat to represent him. This seemed a good possibility.
Now we assume that Jordan will oppose the negotiations. We have to
wait until Jordan is willing to negotiate. The Palestinians won’t just ac-
cept what Egypt has accepted.
President Carter: What Foreign Minister Dayan said is accurate. If
Jordan delays coming into the negotiations, Egypt would represent the
Arab peoples after consulting with the Jordanians and Palestinians.
This is what Sadat wrote me in a letter.10 I thought that Israel had
agreed. Last November, the question of the autonomy seemed to be a
major obstacle. Sadat called me11 to try to break the deadlock. He said
that he was ready to go ahead in Gaza alone. He is not trying to put off
Gaza, nor is he trying to claim Gaza. He was trying to break a deadlock.
It is not possible for Egypt to help in Gaza without some kind of
liaision.
I am anxious to hear Israeli suggestions on how to resolve this
problem. Sadat doesn’t want to have Egyptian police on the Jordan
River, but he does want to work out the modalities for the self-
governing authority. There are doubts in the Arab world and some feel
that Israel wants to delay the establishment of the self-governing au-
thority. I share these doubts. If actions can be taken by Israel to keep the
Jordanians and the Palestinians from participating, then you can keep
the area forever. Mr. Sharon talks about one million settlers. This makes
it impossible for the West Bank Palestinians to join the talks. I can’t see
how much you really want the autonomy to work. But my word of
honor is at stake. We agreed to recognize the legitimate rights of the
Palestinians.
10 Presumably, a reference to the September 17, 1978, side letter from Sadat to
Carter, attached to the Camp David Accords, stating that Egypt would “be prepared to
assume the Arab role” in the implementation of the provisions of a comprehensive settle-
ment related to the West Bank and Gaza “following consultations with Jordan and the
representatives of the Palestinian people.” See Document 57.
11 See Document 132.
