1955 415 they take initiative in moving our meetings to another area in same building so that we are entirely out of Fonmin area where we are now meeting. UAJ 300. Letter from Robertson to Erskine1 Washington, October 19, 1955 Dear General Erskine: I refer to our previous correspondence regarding unaccounted-for United States Military personnel and our exchanges of views regard­ ing the accounting to be demanded at Geneva by Ambassador Johnson from the Chinese Communist representative. It appears that the Chinese Communist representative may respond to Ambassador Johnson’s request for an accounting by making a coun­ terdemand for an accounting for Chinese military personnel, including those who, in accordance with the Armistice Agreement, chose not to be repatriated. I believe that our chances for favorable action on the release of the imprisoned civilians, as well as on our demand for this account­ ing, will be improved if we are able to render as full an accounting as possible for any list the Chinese Communist representative may sub­ mit. I understand an extensive accounting for Chinese personnel on lists previously submitted by the Communist side through the Military Armistice Commission in Korea has already been prepared, but not handed over to the Communists because of their refusal to account for our side’s unaccounted-­for personnel. I would appreciate receiving from you any general suggestions and comments you may have as to how Ambassador Johnson might be instructed to respond to a Chinese Communist demand for an account­ ing for their personnel from the Korean War. I would also like to know your estimate, based on past Communist demands through the MAC, of the probable size and breakdown of the list which the Chinese Com­ munist representative may submit, together with our position and capabilities with respect to furnishing the desired recounting. Sincerely yours, Walter S. Robertson Assistant Secretary 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/10–1955. Secret. Drafted by Osborn on October 17.
