Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II Background/Analysis In six weeks the U.S. will participate with some 135 other nations in the UN Water Conference, the first world economic conference to take place in this Administration. The Conference will address the fundamental policy question of how the global fixed stock of water can best be managed to satisfy mounting requirements for agriculture, domestic and industrial uses. As the next in a series of world conferences under UN sponsorship, it is expected to act on water-related recommendations which emerged from the earlier World Food Conference and the Habitat Conference and will impact on the later Desertification Conference.2 The U.S. initially opposed the convening of a UN Conference on Water. After it was approved by the UNGA, however, Secretary Kissinger, in his speech to the Fourth Ministerial Meeting of the UN Conference on Trade and Development on May 6, 1976 declared . . . “We will play an active role at the United Nations Water Conference—putting forward practical measures to share our knowledge and experience.”3 Preparations have been carried out with the support of the Water Resources Council, with the participation of a broad spectrum of U.S. Governmental and non-Governmental organizations with water resources interests and programs. We have participated actively in the international preparatory phase of the Conference, focusing on developing and presenting U.S. experiences and ideas relevant to priority water management problems confronting the international community. Preparatory efforts under the former Administration were based on an interagency consensus that the U.S. should adopt a relatively low profile at the Conference. Unlike previous UN conferences (on Environment, Population, Food and Human Settlements),4 we have not planned to announce any new U.S. funding or program commitments or other initiatives. Rather, the strategy selected was one which would draw on and highlight the extensive U.S. water resources activities already underway and planned which have international relevance. Recognizing that the new Administration may desire a more forthcoming U.S. role, we are now attempting to identify major U.S. initiatives—par- 2 Reference is to the second meeting of the World Food Council in Rome, Italy, June
