928
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
Background/Analysis
In six weeks the U.S. will participate with some 135 other nations
in the UN Water Conference, the first world economic conference to
take place in this Administration. The Conference will address the fun-
damental policy question of how the global fixed stock of water can
best be managed to satisfy mounting requirements for agriculture, do-
mestic and industrial uses. As the next in a series of world conferences
under UN sponsorship, it is expected to act on water-related recom-
mendations which emerged from the earlier World Food Conference
and the Habitat Conference and will impact on the later Desertification
Conference.2
The U.S. initially opposed the convening of a UN Conference on
Water. After it was approved by the UNGA, however, Secretary Kissin-
ger, in his speech to the Fourth Ministerial Meeting of the UN Confer-
ence on Trade and Development on May 6, 1976 declared . . . “We will
play an active role at the United Nations Water Conference—putting
forward practical measures to share our knowledge and experience.”3
Preparations have been carried out with the support of the Water Re-
sources Council, with the participation of a broad spectrum of U.S.
Governmental and non-Governmental organizations with water re-
sources interests and programs. We have participated actively in the
international preparatory phase of the Conference, focusing on
developing and presenting U.S. experiences and ideas relevant to
priority water management problems confronting the international
community.
Preparatory efforts under the former Administration were based
on an interagency consensus that the U.S. should adopt a relatively low
profile at the Conference. Unlike previous UN conferences (on Environ-
ment, Population, Food and Human Settlements),4 we have not planned
to announce any new U.S. funding or program commitments or other initia-
tives. Rather, the strategy selected was one which would draw on and
highlight the extensive U.S. water resources activities already un-
derway and planned which have international relevance.
Recognizing that the new Administration may desire a more forthcoming
U.S. role, we are now attempting to identify major U.S. initiatives—par-
2 Reference is to the second meeting of the World Food Council in Rome, Italy, June
14–17, 1976; Habitat: UN Conference on Human Settlements in Vancouver, Canada, May
31–June 11, 1976; and the UN Conference on Desertification scheduled for late August
1977.
3 Kissinger’s address, entitled “UNCTAD IV: Expanding Cooperation for Global
Economic Development,” is printed in Department of State Bulletin, May 31, 1976, pp.
657–672. Kissinger asserted that the United States “will play a leading role in applying
water resources technology to such objectives as improving the quality and productivity
of agriculture and developing new industry.” (Ibid., p. 667)
4 United Nations conferences on the environment, population, and food took place
respectively in Stockholm, Sweden (June 5–16, 1972), Bucharest, Romania (August 19–30,
1974), and Rome, Italy (November 5–16, 1974).
