28 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI basic START approach is sound, as long as we deploy a survivable ICBM. (If we don’t do that, we’re in trouble with or without START.) There are a few agreed elements we may wish to reconsider, however. The limit of 1600 on delivery vehicles will not bind us in the near term, because near-­term options for deploying our 6000 warheads would leave us with fewer than 1600 missiles and bombers. But over the long term, we may want to distribute our warheads among more missiles and bombers to enhance survivability, and we cannot assume a START Treaty would have been superseded by another agreement by then. Allowing the 1600 limit to increase over time, excluding single-RV missiles from the limit, or replacing it with a limit only on bombers (which is needed due to the permissive bomber weapon counting rules), may be preferable. We may also want to augment the plan for verifying mobile ICBMs, if we choose a deployment concept other than roador rail-­mobile, on which the currently agreed verification regime is based. Finally, we may need to take another look at the ballistic missile RV counting rules agreed on at the Washington Summit. The U.S. proposed these rules to prevent overcounting of our warheads, but they create possibilities for Soviet breakout that may cause us problems. As for unresolved issues, four stand out: (1) Our proposal to ban mobile ICBMs serves only to undercut our efforts in Congress to secure support for our ICBM program. It is also unrealistic; regardless of our ICBM plans, the USSR has deployed mobiles and will sign no START Treaty that bans them. We should formulate a proposal that protects our program and, in any event, replace our ban with a warhead limit. (2) Our ALCM proposal currently seeks to exclude from START limits any nuclear ALCM with a range less than 1500 KM. This has been strongly opposed by the Soviets, who would exclude only those nuclear ALCMs with a range less than 600 KM, and has held up resolution of several ALCM issues. We should determine if we really need to protect a nuclear ALCM with a range between 600 and 1500 KM (State is unaware of any such program in the defense budget). (3) The Reagan Administration struggled for years on two key aspects of verification—­suspect-­site inspection and perimeter-­portal monitoring—­and, in the end, came up with approaches that walk a reasonable line between our need for access to Soviet facilities and our need to protect sensitive sites of our own. But since verification would dominate any ratification debate, our positions should be carefully reviewed, with thorough Congressional consultation. (4) SLCMs may be more of an end-­game issue, but since I believe the Soviets will insist on binding limits as a condition for a Treaty, and since
