420  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
There were still Chinese nationals in US who desire to return but have 
not been able to do so. His government had not received lists of names 
even of those individuals I had informed him had departed US. Wang 
said that this was not satisfactory.
3. He continued by stating that 66 American nationals remain in 
China, including 47 “civilians”. Any of these “civilians” who desire to 
return to US may do so in accordance with agreement. As to another 
19 who have “committed offenses”, Wang said that he had previously 
indicated that his government is willing to review case of each of these 
people in accordance with Chinese law.
4. Wang said that “alleged doubt” in US concerning willingness 
of his government to carry out agreement is not justified, and that he 
opposed strongly “alleged statement” that remaining 19  are held as 
hostages. He termed this “deliberate distortion of facts”.
5. He said that each side had invited third country and that all mat­
ters concerning implementation should be referred to these countries. 
It is unnecessary further to bring up matter in these talks. If matter is 
further raised in these talks, he cannot but take it as questioning their 
good faith in implementation of agreed announcement.
6. Wang stated that his side was not raising question of US imple­
mentation in spite of its dissatisfaction on return of Chinese nationals 
in US. He stated he would not raise question of good faith of US in 
carrying out agreement.
7. I replied that advantage of our meeting was informal atmo­
sphere without publicity that enabled us to talk frankly with each other. 
I stated that I hoped we would be able to continue to do so. I told him 
that what I had said this morning was motivated by earnest desire to 
explain frankly situation in my country in regard to talks. I told him 
that if he is dissatisfied with progress of returning Chinese nationals 
from US he should tell me so frankly.
8. I stated that to best of my knowledge no Chinese national who 
wants to return is being prevented from returning by any action by 
my government. I said that any Chinese national who feels he is being 
hindered is free to communicate with Indian Embassy, and that we had 
previously stated that we would accept representations from Indan 
Embassy on behalf of any such nationals. I said that I knew of no case 
thus far in which such representations had been received and that we 
would act promptly should any such case arise.
9. I said that case of 19 Americans is entirely different. I said that 
only action by Wang’s government can permit them to leave. Whatever 
he may feel concerning justice or injustice of my statements regarding 
public opinion in US, it is fact that has to be considered. I am sure his 
government follows US press and knows statements I made are not 
based on figment my imagination.
