1104 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III Finally, we should continue to take actions that foster a more open trading system. Thus, in addition to implementing agreements reached in the Multilateral Trade Negotiations, we should consider revision and extension of the Generalized Scheme of Preferences, renegotiation of the Multifiber Arrangement,5 and a request for new authority from Congress to engage in further bilateral tariff negotiations with individual developing countries after current authority expires in 1981. Some of the measures being considered—particularly those dealing with change within the international financial institutions and with trade—would not require any substantial new, budgetary outlays on our part. Indeed, in the long-run, trade and financial reforms should contribute to greater U.S. and global economic growth. We cannot hope, however, to make the full amount of progress that is both needed and feasible—in such important areas as food and energy—without taking other actions that will require additional funds. Much of the incremental funding can and should come from OPEC countries, but we and other developed countries will have to provide some additional resources ourselves. The reports of both your Commission on World Hunger6 and Task Force on Global Resources and Environment7 address from different perspectives a number of the same issues explored by the Brandt Commission. The common problems include hunger, population growth, resource depletion, and environmental degradation. A call to eliminate widespread poverty is the central recommendation of all three reports. It is the cause of world hunger and it contributes to the most acute environmental dangers, such as the loss of soil and forests. All three Reports also emphasize the need for greater public understanding of the long term issues and greater support for foreign assistance. We are closely coordinating our efforts on review of the Brandt Report with the work of the Task Force and with follow-up on the Hunger Report to ensure the presentation to you of a consistent set 5 See Document 8. 6 In March 1980, the Presidential Commission on World Hunger issued its final report, “Overcoming World Hunger: The Challenge Ahead, Report of the Presidential Commission on World Hunger—March 1980.” For the text of Carter’s April 26 statement on the report, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Jimmy Carter, 1980–81, Book I, p. 777. Documentation on the Commission and its report is printed in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. II, Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs. 7 On July 24, the Department of State and the Council on Environmental Quality issued a joint report on environmental issues, “Global 2000 Report to the President.” Documentation on the report is ibid. On that same day, Carter issued a statement on the report and also announced the establishment of a Presidential Task Force on Global Resources and Environment. (Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Jimmy Carter, 1980–81, Book II, pp. 1415–1416) The Presidential Task Force on Global Resources and Environment released its final report, “Global Future: Time to Act,” in January 1981. (“Ideas &
