1104
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Finally, we should continue to take actions that foster a more open
trading system. Thus, in addition to implementing agreements reached
in the Multilateral Trade Negotiations, we should consider revision
and extension of the Generalized Scheme of Preferences, renegotiation
of the Multifiber Arrangement,5 and a request for new authority from
Congress to engage in further bilateral tariff negotiations with indi-
vidual developing countries after current authority expires in 1981.
Some of the measures being considered—particularly those
dealing with change within the international financial institutions and
with trade—would not require any substantial new, budgetary outlays
on our part. Indeed, in the long-run, trade and financial reforms should
contribute to greater U.S. and global economic growth. We cannot
hope, however, to make the full amount of progress that is both needed
and feasible—in such important areas as food and energy—without
taking other actions that will require additional funds. Much of the in-
cremental funding can and should come from OPEC countries, but we
and other developed countries will have to provide some additional re-
sources ourselves.
The reports of both your Commission on World Hunger6 and Task
Force on Global Resources and Environment7 address from different
perspectives a number of the same issues explored by the Brandt Com-
mission. The common problems include hunger, population growth,
resource depletion, and environmental degradation. A call to eliminate
widespread poverty is the central recommendation of all three reports.
It is the cause of world hunger and it contributes to the most acute envi-
ronmental dangers, such as the loss of soil and forests.
All three Reports also emphasize the need for greater public un-
derstanding of the long term issues and greater support for foreign
assistance. We are closely coordinating our efforts on review of the
Brandt Report with the work of the Task Force and with follow-up on
the Hunger Report to ensure the presentation to you of a consistent set
5 See Document 8.
6 In March 1980, the Presidential Commission on World Hunger issued its final re-
port, “Overcoming World Hunger: The Challenge Ahead, Report of the Presidential
Commission on World Hunger—March 1980.” For the text of Carter’s April 26 statement
on the report, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Jimmy Carter, 1980–81,
Book I, p. 777. Documentation on the Commission and its report is printed in Foreign Rela-
tions, 1977–1980, vol. II, Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs.
7 On July 24, the Department of State and the Council on Environmental Quality is-
sued a joint report on environmental issues, “Global 2000 Report to the President.” Docu-
mentation on the report is ibid. On that same day, Carter issued a statement on the report
and also announced the establishment of a Presidential Task Force on Global Resources
and Environment. (Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Jimmy Carter, 1980–81,
Book II, pp. 1415–1416) The Presidential Task Force on Global Resources and Environ-
ment released its final report, “Global Future: Time to Act,” in January 1981. (“Ideas &
Trends,” The New York Times, January 18, 1981, p. E8)
