Czechoslovakia 349 be returned to Czechoslovakia upon agreement between the three partners. Moreover, under the Wolff Bill the claimants would have to wait 14–25 years to get their money, whereas under State’s proposal, once the issue had been settled, they could get their money immediately. (C) III. Domestic Implications State’s decision to move forward was taken after close consultation with Congress and the Czechoslovak-American community. Among those in Congress concerned with the issue, there was considerable sentiment that State should finally get the issue settled. The Czechoslovak-American community, particularly the Czechoslovak National Congress, also supported an equitable settlement of the issue because many of the claimants were getting old and were about to die. (C) In short, while an election year is obviously not the most propitious time to table a proposal, our hand was forced by Wolff.4 However, unlike the return of the Crown of St. Stephen to Hungary, in State’s view, this is not an issue which is likely to stir up a hornet’s nest domestically.5 (C) Our proposal envisages a settlement of about 160 percent of the original principal, thus allowing us to show firmness to any domestic critics. (It should be noted in this regard that claims settlements with China and other East European countries were considerably less: Poland—41%; Romania—39%; Bulgaria—63%; Peking—42%. Moreover, our present proposal with Czechoslovakia is considerably better than the 1974 proposal, which envisaged a 41% settlement.) (C) No thought is being given to improving relations with Prague (though a settlement would clear the decks for such an improvement if and when it became politically desirable). Lastly, any settlement is far down the road. The Czechs have reacted negatively to our proposal because it is high and so out of line with other settlements, and they are not likely to agree even to begin negotiations for some time. (C) 4 See footnote 5, Document 114, for background on the Wolff bill. 5 Aaron highlighted this passage with an arrow in the margin. He wrote at the bottom of the memorandum: “ZB—Question is: Will Wolff bill pass this year? If not, why press it now? I think we should slow this down. DA.” Brzezinski responded: “DA. Slow it down. I tend to feel the same way. ZB.”
