Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III any new funding. This section presents consensus recommendations in the areas of credit, regulation, unemployment, and taxes. [Omitted here are recommendations on credit, regulation, unemployment, and taxes.] III. Trade The Section 201 case before the USITC,4 if it results in a finding of injury, will require that you reexamine your position on short-term import relief. Some of your advisers believe that you should request the USITC to accelerate its investigation in order to demonstrate your recognition of the urgency of the situation and as an initial signal to the Japanese and domestic interests that you may be prepared to modify your position on this issue and consider appropriate relief. Background It is clear that your handling of the import issue is of central importance in this review. Domestically, the unions, companies (in varying degrees), and many members of Congress feel that import restraints are necessary to demonstrate your support for the U.S. auto industry and its workers. Internationally, decisions in this area will be watched closely and may significantly affect the willingness of other countries to fulfill the Venice Summit commitment to resist protectionist pressures (particularly in light of the decision to extend color TV relief5 and of foreign anxiety about the steel dumping cases6) and the climate in the international trading system—even though most countries already have significant barriers to auto imports. The Administration’s current policy, which has been stated repeatedly before congressional committees and in other public fora, is to oppose voluntary Japanese export restraints and legislated import restraints on autos. This policy, approved by you in March,7 was predicated on the adverse consequences of restrictions for our anti-inflation, trade, and energy policy objectives and the limited benefits to domestic 4 The UAW filed an automotive import relief petition with the USITC on June 12. (Clyde H. Farnsworth, “Auto Workers Union Asks U.S. To Curb Foreign Car Imports,”
