718
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
any new funding. This section presents consensus recommendations in
the areas of credit, regulation, unemployment, and taxes.
[Omitted here are recommendations on credit, regulation, unem-
ployment, and taxes.]
III. Trade
The Section 201 case before the USITC,4 if it results in a finding of
injury, will require that you reexamine your position on short-term im-
port relief. Some of your advisers believe that you should request the
USITC to accelerate its investigation in order to demonstrate your rec-
ognition of the urgency of the situation and as an initial signal to the
Japanese and domestic interests that you may be prepared to modify
your position on this issue and consider appropriate relief.
Background
It is clear that your handling of the import issue is of central impor-
tance in this review. Domestically, the unions, companies (in varying
degrees), and many members of Congress feel that import restraints are
necessary to demonstrate your support for the U.S. auto industry and
its workers. Internationally, decisions in this area will be watched
closely and may significantly affect the willingness of other countries to
fulfill the Venice Summit commitment to resist protectionist pressures
(particularly in light of the decision to extend color TV relief5 and of for-
eign anxiety about the steel dumping cases6) and the climate in the in-
ternational trading system—even though most countries already have
significant barriers to auto imports.
The Administration’s current policy, which has been stated repeat-
edly before congressional committees and in other public fora, is to
oppose voluntary Japanese export restraints and legislated import
restraints on autos. This policy, approved by you in March,7 was predi-
cated on the adverse consequences of restrictions for our anti-inflation,
trade, and energy policy objectives and the limited benefits to domestic
4 The UAW filed an automotive import relief petition with the USITC on June 12.
(Clyde H. Farnsworth, “Auto Workers Union Asks U.S. To Curb Foreign Car Imports,”
The New York Times, June 13, 1980, p. D9) On August 4, the Ford Motor Company also
filed an automotive import relief petition with the USITC. (Peter Behr, “Ford Asks ITC to
Put Sharp Import Limits on Japan Cars,” The Washington Post, August 5, 1980, p. D7)
5 See Document 244.
6 See Document 238.
7 Askew
sought
Carter’s
decision
on
whether
the
United
States
should
“[d]iscourage the Japanese from restraining exports of automobiles” in a March 14 mem-
orandum. A handwritten note at the top of Askew’s memorandum reads: “Original to
Camp David.” (Carter Library, White House Central Files, Subject File, Box TA–30, TA
4–16, 1/20/77–1/20/81) No copy of Askew’s memorandum bearing Carter’s decision
was found.
