500.A12/42a: Telegram
[Document 11]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, February 21, 1925—1 p.m.
94. On February 19 I requested the French Ambassador to see me at the Department. I
said that he had doubtless noticed in the public press considerable discussion growing
out of Chamberlain’s statement in the House of Commons, in answer to a question, that
there had been conversations with the American Ambassador on the calling of a new
arms conference by the United States. Chamberlain had declined to enter upon
discussion of the subject, stating that the conversations were wholly informal.
I said that the press was making a great deal out of incidents that had very slight
significance. I wished the French Government to know what had taken place as I would
not care to have it supposed that negotiations were going on without suitable
information to French Foreign Office. What had happened was that in a recent
interview between Ambassador Kellogg and Chamberlain, preparatory to the former’s
departure from London, Chamberlain himself had brought up the subject of another
conference at Washington, suggesting that an invitation extended by President
Coolidge might have favorable reception on the part of the powers, and had indicated a
favorable attitude on the part of the British Government. Chamberlain had recognized
unlikelihood that anything could be done at such a conference in relation to land
armaments but had thought that progress might be made with respect to further naval
limitation. I said that on receiving advice of this intimation I had instructed our
Ambassador to inquire of Chamberlain whether he had any definite basis for supposing
that other Governments might favorably receive such an invitation. It then appeared
that upon this point there was nothing definite.
I called attention to the fact that from time to time there had been recurrent
conversations of an informal character between our representatives abroad and foreign
offices as well as between ambassadors here and myself on possibility of another
conference. The position of this Government remained what it had been, that is, it
desired to go forward from the point which had been reached at the Washington
Conference and to obtain a further agreement on limitation of auxiliary naval craft. I
would not refer to the difficulties encountered at the Washington Conference. I should
be greatly pleased to learn that there was a prospect for removal of these difficulties.
This Government did not desire to call a conference, of course, unless there was a
