Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI —Since we have publicly advertised what we are doing (MHV, conventional, non-nuclear ABM), they can point specifically to such programs. —They have previously contended that the US is the aggressor in this area and they are not. In a public relations move, such as the neutron bomb, they could probably make this view stick. —The Soviets may insist on restrictions to the Shuttle during this period. —This could include no tests of the teleoperator (jeopardy to skylab).4 —During treaty negotiations, the absence of a no test agreement could force the Soviets to an acceptable agreement. —A rapid moving US ASAT program could give them incentive to come to an agreement before a US test occurs. —Politically, a “no test” agreement during negotiations could be a problem. —It would be difficult to negotiate an agreement that did not include such an article. —We are not ready to come to such a conclusion. —The US would always face an asymmetry. —A caveat that says the US will test if we determine the negotiations are not progressing does not help the situation. —The President would be put in a position of breaking an agreement and of justifying that the Soviets were not negotiating in good faith. —The implications with respect to de´tente would prevent us from ever making such a move. ALTERNATIVES 1—Do not request “no testing” during negotiations and make it clear to the Soviets that we are progressing as rapidly as possible. 2—Have a “no test” agreement that expires at the earliest time the US could test the MHV. 3—Have a “no test” agreement for all other kill mechanisms except EW and low altitude non-nuclear kill. 4 Skylab was a manned space station built by NASA that had been damaged upon its initial launch in 1974. During the Carter administration, NASA scientists hoped that the space shuttle could attach an experimental booster, the teleoperator retrieval system, to the station, thereby sending Skylab into higher orbit and extending its life another five years. These plans were preempted when Skylab reentered the atmosphere and disintegrated in 1979.
