696 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement 1959, in the Casa Presidential of the President and Ministers concerned, etc., to discuss reprogramming. On the technical assistance side, the President demurred over the cancellation of SCIDA, saying that this would look like censure. I told him it was necessary to clean the slate. After about three attempts on his part, he got the point. With respect to the industrialization loan of the Export-Import Bank, he stated that Dr. Mirón could go to Washington for this purpose. During the discussion, the President was given a copy of the talking notes. He asked if he might keep them, to which assent was given. This, it appeared, would be helpful in any thinking or review he might make before the meeting, which it was felt reasonably sure he would do. While his English is very adequate, he does like to read slowly by himself. Notice of termination of United States support of the Agricultural Servicio was prepared. It took the form of simultaneous letters to the Minister of Agriculture and to the Personero del Presidente8 from the Director of the USOM/G. In order that there be no possibility of misunderstanding, copies of these letters were forwarded, on July 8, to the Foreign Minister under cover of a first person note. Copy of the note and its enclosures is enclosed.9 The meeting set up with the President and heads of government entities concerned was held in the Casa Presidencial at 3:00 p.m., July 8. People were seated about the dining table which accommodates 40 people and there was a solid bank of about that many more close around. The various Ministers concerned, plus the head of the Agrarian Department, the Bank of Guatemala, the Foreign Minister and their deputies, advisers, etc., were present. The President began the session by stating that the meeting was for the purpose of considering possible changes in the aid program. He pulled out the talking notes referred to above and asked if the Ambassador wished to go through them. This opportunity was taken. A review was made of the President’s wish to adapt the program more to present-­day conditions and to the situation faced by the Government in the country, the Ambassador’s trip to Washington and the results thereof. (See enclosures, especially talking notes). After running down a series of items on special assistance and noting the amount of funds remaining in each as of June 30, discussion was invited as to each of the items and question was raised as to what 8 Adolfo Colmenares, Coordinator for the Guatemalan Government, and Government Deputy for Technical Cooperation Affairs. 9 Not printed; see footnote 5 to the memorandum from Mallory to Rubottom, June 24, 1959, Document GT–19.
