Romania
717
Deputy Prime Minister Burtica thanked the Vice President. He said
that he had had good discussions with Secretary Klutznick, who was
an old friend of Romania. He had also had productive discussions at
State and with STR.3 (At this point the meeting was interrupted, and
the Vice President took Deputy Prime Minister Burtica in to see the
President, who accepted the letter and asked Minister Burtica to convey
his greetings to President Ceausescu.)4 (C)
Resuming the discussions again, the Vice President stated that the
President would respond to President Ceausescu’s letter through our
Ambassador in Bucharest5 and that he, the Vice President, would report
his conversations with Burtica directly to the President. Burtica’s visit,
in his view, was an indication of the good relations between Romania
and the United States. Recalling President Ceausescu’s visit to the
United States in 1978, he said that the United States took a great deal
of satisfaction from the strengthening of bilateral relations which had
occurred in the interval. As far as trade was concerned, he noted that
he had been one of the original authors of MFN for Romania. This, in
his view, was a symbol with some substance and an indication that
we were now on a good course. (C)
Deputy Prime Minister Burtica thanked the Vice President very
much, stating that the Romanians too were highly appreciative of the
development of good relations between the two countries. Since Presi-
dent Carter’s meeting with President Ceausescu, relations had devel-
oped considerably. The current session of the Joint Commission was
a good example of the way in which both countries could cooperate.
He stressed, however, that both countries needed to find new possibili-
ties for expanding cooperation. After the granting of MFN, commercial
exchanges had developed favorably, but it was unwieldy to have to
3 Telegram 109956 to Bucharest, April 26, reported the April 22 conversation between
Christopher and Burtica at the Department. Burtica, the telegram reported, “raised
bilateral issues of U.S. export controls, access for Romanian vessels to Hampton Roads,
and multi-year MFN.” After renewing Romania’s request for access of its vessels to
Hampton Roads, Burtica was informed that the administration had reviewed the issue
intensively but that it was not possible to agree to the Romanian request. The two officials
also discussed the hostage crisis in Iran, the Middle East, and Afghanistan. (National
Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800206–0636) The conversation between
Klutznick and Burtica on April 22 was reported in telegram 114649 to Bucharest, May
1. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800216–0360)
4 The President met with Burtica in the Oval Office from 1:20 to 1:25 p.m. (Carter
Libary, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary, April 23, 1980)
5 In telegram 137585 to Bucharest, May 24, the Department instructed Aggrey to
request a meeting with Andrei and deliver Carter’s response to Ceausescu. Carter assured
Ceausescu that, despite deteriorating U.S.-Soviet relations, he was “determined to main-
tain a dialogue with the countries of Eastern Europe and to pursue a differentiated
approach to each of them,” and in particular with Romania. (National Archives, RG 59,
Central Foreign Policy File, D800255–1010)
