356 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement equitable distribution of income and in identifying the United States with legitimate popular economic aspirations. 3. Need for Program: a. Colombia’s urgent need. On one hand, Colombia has much arable land not in economic use—­governmental lands that are under-­ developed and generally difficult of access, and private lands that are under very light use or completely in disuse. On the other hand, Colombia has hundreds of thousands of small farmers working tiny infertile plots or dispossessed from their lands by guerilla violence and idle in huge festering urban shanty-­towns. Our Embassy reports, and we agree, that the “fundamental question facing Colombia and, therefore, the Lleras Administration is whether social and economic betterment for the large underprivileged majority of the Colombian population can be achieved sufficiently rapidly in an evolutionary manner to avoid an attempt to achieve the same ends by revolutionary means,” and “ . . . a major front . . . is . . . land reform.” Colombia needs agrarian reform both politically, to decrease the risk of insurrection, and economically, to increase agricultural production. b. President Lleras wants assistance. President Lleras has told our Embassy: a) The question of providing land to the millions of poverty-­ stricken peasants in Colombia was a crucial and urgent one; b) the danger of Communist exploitation of this situation was great and imminent; c) the Colombian Government’s financial sources for mounting such a program were very limited; d) U.S. assistance in an agrarian reform program in Latin America would make a tremendous impact throughout the continent, and the United States should pick some country for an example (ensayo); e) such assistance would insure the moderate evolution of agrarian reform and avoid the extremist solution from exploding as in Cuba. c. Evolutionary progress in agrarian reform is urgently required in U.S. interests. Castro agents and Cuban Communists are working with their Colombian fellows among the peasants, selling the Cuban type agrarian reform which, in effect, invites land “reform” by violent takeover. Their activities could precipitate insurrection that would lead to unsound Colombian land reform and to a political defeat for the United States. USOM/Bogotá reports Communism is “capitalizing on the fact that many peasants have nowhere to go while large tracts of land are held by city people for purely speculative purposes.” President Lleras has about 2-1/2 years left in office in which to demonstrate his moderate government’s intentions and ability effectively to tackle Colombia’s basic problems. It is essential that we effectively help him to deny to the Communists the monopoly of hope. d. Support for agrarian reform is in accord with U.S. policy. Speaking to the Tenth Session of the FAO Conference in Rome in November
