3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
July–December 1978
459
147.
Memorandum From Jessica Tuchman Mathews of the
National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant
for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, September 20, 1978
SUBJECT
Human Rights and The Olympics
In winning their bid to hold the Olympics in Moscow the Soviets
scored a great potential coup for both their foreign exchange earnings
and international prestige and propaganda interests. However it is also
a big risk, for the spotlight could easily shift from the Games to the
human rights issue. I believe we should be looking at ways to exploit
that risk, and to exact the highest possible price in terms of advancing
our own human rights interests.
—There are already rumors in the USSR that Jewish emigration
will be cut off some time before the Games. Some believe that the high
current rate of emigration is designed to ease the tension before the
Games (though visas are being granted only to first time requesters and
not to any refuseniks or to any prominent dissidents). Are there ways
to exploit this situation: Can we accelerate emigration between now
and 1980? Should we suggest to the Soviets that they grant visas to a
particular list of individuals who are of concern to us, with the quiet
implication that otherwise these individuals will be a focus of attention
at the Games? Are there other ways to reach the same end?
—What about access to Russian citizens by press and athletes
during the Games? Should we be pushing for maximum access in the
true Olympic spirit? What are the terms of the NBC contract? After
paying through the nose (a record high price) for the broadcast rights
has NBC insisted on anything in the way of freedom of coverage or will
they only be allowed to film designated glories of Soviet culture? If you
watched any of the last several Olympics you will remember all the
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Global Issues,
Bloomfield Subject File, Box 17, Human Rights: Olympics: 9/78–4/80. Secret. Copies
were sent to Reginald Bartholomew and Jerry Schecter. Brzezinski wrote in the memo-
randum’s left-hand margin, “Convene an inter-agency meeting to discuss—then let’s de-
cide if a PR [Presidential Review] is needed or WG [Working Group] instead. Good idea.
ZB.” David Aaron wrote in the memorandum’s upper right-hand corner, “She
[Tuchman] is getting better on this issue. DA.” Immediately below Aaron’s comment, an
unknown hand wrote, “mini- pre PRC?” The memorandum is excessively underlined,
also by an unknown hand. Mathews raised some of these same issues again in her Oc-
tober 27 memorandum to Brzezinski entitled “Human Rights at the Summit.” (Carter Li-
brary, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Global Issues, Bloomfield Subject File,
Box 17, Human Rights: USSR: 7/77–5/79)
