This Government accepts the interpretation by the Austrian Government of the words “transit duty” as not comprising charges for visa certificates for persons in transit. The reference to transit duties upon merchandise which is the subject of monopolies, as tobacco, salt and explosives is not clear to the Department. If the Austrian Government would understand that the provisions of Articles VIII and XIII apply to articles the subject of monopoly in a different manner or to a less degree than to other articles of merchandise, this Government would desire to receive and consider the views of the Austrian Government in regard to the matter. Article X. (Article XIII of the Treaty with Germany). At the request of the German negotiators the following sentence was added at the end of the first paragraph of this Article: “The foregoing stipulations do not apply to the organization of and participation in political associations”. The sentence is also included in the treaties signed with Hungary (Article X) and Esthonia (Article XIII). It is not included in the treaty signed with Salvador. This Government does not propose it for inclusion in the Treaty with Austria. It desires, however, that you should bring the sentence and the fact that it is included in the treaties signed by the United States with Germany, Hungary and Esthonia to the attention of the Austrian negotiators and state to them that if Austria desires to have the sentence inserted at the end of the first paragraph of Article X of the Treaty under negotiation, this Government will be glad to agree to it. Article XI. Apparently Austrian law forbids commercial travelers to take orders for merchandise from the consumer but allows them to sell their merchandise only to merchants, industrials and tradesmen. In view of the provisions of Austrian law on the subject, the Austrian negotiators suggested the omission of paragraph (c) of Article XI, which provides that a commercial traveler may sell his samples without obtaining a special license as an importer. They suggested also that paragraph (g) of Article XI, which provides that peddlers and other salesmen who vend directly to the consumer, shall not be considered as commercial travelers, but shall be subject to the license fees levied on business of the kind in which they are engaged, should be modified so as to provide merely that salesmen who vend directly to the consumer shall not be considered commercial travelers. You reported that under the Austrian Constitution the provincial
