1956 1147 problem until principle renunciation of force has been accepted. So long as Chinese Communists threaten to settle disputes by force threatened party cannot be expected contribute directly or indirectly through trade to build-­up of that force. Urge Communists give further consideration US April 16 revision of Wang draft as acceptable formula for mutually advantageous renunciation of force in Taiwan area. 2. Reiterate US dissatisfaction with continued detention ten Amer­ icans. Do not volunteer further reference to US refusal of passports to journalists desiring visit Communist China, as overemphasis probably self-defeating. However if Wang mentions subject, possibly citing US editorials in support his view, reaffirm position taken in press release of August 7. Observe that US Government justified in withholding its approval of travel its nationals in country where American citizens are still subjected to deprivation of basic human rights. Point out that US Government has responsibility for welfare of citizens abroad and when any are wrongfully detained by foreign government not conforming accepted international standards serious international problem created. 3. FYI American Red Cross will commence interviewing Chinese prisoners August 20. Expect know results prior your next meeting. Still no word from O’Neill on results his approach Peiping. Hoover 700. Letter 43 from Johnson to McConaughy1 Letter No. 43 Geneva, August 20, 1956 Dear Walter: I am starting this letter to you Monday evening to deal with some of the matters raised in your letter of August 13, and will finish it after the meeting tomorrow. First, let me say that I was startled and distressed at this week’s TIME story directly quoting me on the talks, particularly on my alleged remarks concerning reduction of dangers of war in the Taiwan area. While from a domestic point of view the story is favorable, and TIME’S intentions were the best, it is not of any help to the talks. I saw the story immediately on my arrival here last night and today got hold of the 1 Source: Department of State, Geneva Talks Files, Lot 72D415. Secret; Personal– Informal. Johnson signed the original “Alex.”
