Chapter 2, January–June 1989  237
The DCI believes that this requirement would have a negligible 
effect on our ability to monitor the inventory of Soviet nondeployed 
missiles.
Option 1.  Retain the existing U.S. position; do not add an additional 
treaty requirement that for every launcher destroyed in 
reducing to new limits, one missile associated with that type 
of launcher must also be eliminated or converted to other 
purposes as space launch vehicles. (favored by OSD)
Option 2.  Task an interagency study of the best approach, including, 
where feasible, meeting the objectives set forth above, but 
do not raise with the Soviets at this time. If a satisfactory 
approach can be devised, require missile conversion or 
elimination incident to launcher destruction. (favored by 
State, JCS, ACDA and Ambassador Rowny)
NSC staff note that no alternative now under consideration by 
agencies will result in significant INF-­style missile destructions, but 
would force the conversion (rather than storage) of missiles withdrawn 
from ICBM or SLBM launchers. On balance, the study is worth doing, 
although we should reserve judgment on the desirability of making a 
proposal to the Soviets.
NSC Staff Recommendation
That you approve Option 2.6
START—Air Breathing Systems
1. ALCM Range. START distinguishes between short-­range missiles 
(which are limited as bombs) and long-­range ALCMs. The issue is what 
range threshold should divide the two classes of cruise missiles.
Discussion
There are two aspects to this issue. First, a range cut-­off of 1500 
kilometers protects future U.S. options to extend the range of nuclear-­
armed cruise missiles on both heavy bombers and on tactical aircraft 
to hedge against improved Soviet air defenses, without having such 
missiles count as ALCMs under START. Although there are no current 
programs for nuclear armed cruise missiles with ranges between 600 
and 1500 kilometers, some believe there is a clear military requirement 
to protect the option to deploy such systems in the future. Second, some 
have argued that the 1,500 km range better protects U.S. options for 
future conventional cruise missiles, pending resolution of how future 
nuclear and conventional cruise missile are to be distinguished from 
6 Scowcroft initialed his approval.
