January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981
1295
The Prime Minister said that Jordan cannot be responsible; it does
not control the Palestinians.
Ambassador Linowitz said the Israelis would see this as a basis for
insurance.
The Prime Minister said that the Israelis are in control—there would
be no real problems. The Palestinians will say that they want self-
determination, and to elect machinery to talk with the U.S. and others,
on machinery to reach self-determination. There will be no difficulty in
doing that. But this has to be an untied process not linked to autonomy.
Ambassador Veliotes asked whether the Prime Minister would ex-
clude that this group could talk with us on autonomy.
The Prime Minister said that they would seek to talk to the U.S.
Dr. Brzezinski said that we talk with some mayors, now. If a mecha-
nism were set up on the West Bank to articulate positions, however,
they would say they want an independent Palestinian state; they
would say they would talk with us about an independent Palestinian
state. That, in practice, is what they would do.
The President asked: then what?
Dr. Brzezinski said that they would then say let’s talk outside of the
Camp David framework. To be sure, we would have a fresh start, but
that would take us back to three years ago. What the Prime Minister is
doing is trying to get started a political approach which will derail the
Camp David Accords.
The Prime Minister said that one has seen this situation so many
times, as with Zimbabwe and Mugabe,10 who now seems a peaceful
man: myths get exploded. He (the Prime Minister) is arguing that the
majority living on the West Bank know that if they talk about an inde-
pendent Palestinian state, the U.S. would say no; but if the discussion
were about self-determination, that permits everything. It keeps op-
tions open. But the five-year transition means that the end is closed: the
Palestinians would get only rights like the post office and sanitation.
Dr. Brzezinski said that we have a process that is for Arab aspira-
tions. The other party—Israel—wants to incorporate the West Bank.
This can’t happen, but we need to see Israel’s legitimate security needs.
The outlook in Israel on the Palestinians in the last 3 or 4 years has
undergone tremendous change. Lots of Israelis now see the reality of
the Palestinians—e.g. General Harkabi. Camp David is a mechanism to
get Israel to make concessions in practice. It can translate demands into
reality. But if the demands are articulated in their totality, it will derail
the process and set it back.
10 Robert Mugabe, leader of the Zimbabwe African National Union and Zimbab-
wean Prime Minister from April 1980.
