362 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement It is by no means true that all, or even a large fraction, of the research studies of the kind mentioned in (3) should lead to weapon system developments. The practical question is whether expensive delays and mistakes could be prevented by reducing the number of developments and using the money thereby saved to assure, by research studies, that the developments actually undertaken embody the best approaches to their military objectives. Is the ratio of research to development expenditure too small for most economical operation and for the furtherance of our military tech­ nology? Any proposed reduction in research needs to be examined carefully in terms of its effect on the future national science effort and current policy for strengthening this effort. C. Communications 1. High altitude nuclear weapons effects Do any of the planned communication systems that are expected to operate during an all-­out war depend upon the ionosphere? Any such systems are expected to be undependable if high altitude nuclear explosions take place anywhere within hundreds of miles of the propagation path. A single shot of this kind produced strong effects, not yet fully understood, during recent tests in the Pacific. Such communication systems, if they exist in present plans, may require substitution of other types, such as cable, which would not be affected. Are the budget implications of these findings reflected in the FY–60 budget? 2. Global Communications Systems Should the expansion and improvement of a military global com­ munications system be developed as a unified communications system for all three services? All services require communication to many points on the globe. The increased vulnerability of overseas communications to enemy countermeasures and the corresponding need for greater reliability through use of alternate compatible routes raises the basic question of whether there is not need for a properly designed unified communica­ tions system. Has this possibility been examined for the armed serv­ ices? The individual services will, in addition to any common global net, continue to need specialized communications to their mobile ele­ ments and for command purposes. D. Navy Radio Telescope The intelligence application of the system has been seriously ques­ tioned as well as the desirability of making so large a jump in size at one step. In the light of these technical questions, is the continuation of this project warranted under conditions of a tight budget?
