Arms Control and Disarmament  1605
444.	 Memorandum From Berkner to Killian1
March 24, 1959
SUBJECT
Concealment of Underground Explosions
The Panel on Seismic Improvement, appointed by the Chairman 
of the President’s Science Advisory Committee, considered the general 
problem of the concealment of underground nuclear tests at its meeting 
on 5 and 6 March 1959. The Panel reviewed various proposed methods 
of concealing underground nuclear tests. The Panel concluded that, on 
the basis of present knowledge, the most promising approach was the 
method of reducing the distant seismic signal from an underground 
explosion by suitable design of the shot chamber. The Panel, therefore, 
examined this proposal in detail.
The enclosed report by the Panel, “Certain Aspects of the Con­
cealment of Underground Explosions,” summarizes the preliminary 
theoretical analysis of this particular method as well as the possible 
limitations and deficiencies of the theory. On the basis of this prelim­
inary theoretical analysis, available experimental information, and 
other practical considerations, the Panel arrived at the following gen­
eral conclusion on concealment which was included as paragraph 4 (f) 
in the summary report of the Panel’s findings, “Report of the Panel on 
Seismic Improvement,” dated March 16, 1959:
“In considering the problem of concealment, the PSI has exam­
ined the possibilities of reducing the magnitude of the seismic sig­
nal from a nuclear explosion by means of suitable design of the shot 
chamber. The PSI concludes that it would be possible by this tech­
nique to reduce the seismic signal by a factor of ten or more. The seis­
mic signal from one Hardtack II shot (Evans) was ten times less than 
that from another shot (Tamalpais) of approximately the same yield 
although no attempt was made to reduce the signal. Moreover, pre­
liminary theoretical studies have shown that it is possible in princi­
ple by this technique to reduce the seismic signal from a given yield 
by a much greater factor than this. In view of the many complexities 
involved, it is necessary that this theory be tested with appropriately 
designed experiments to determine how large a decoupling factor 
can actually be realized in practice. While many of these tests can be 
carried out with high explosives, complete evaluation of the theory 
probably cannot be made without nuclear explosions. All possible 
seismic instrumentation should be employed in connection with such 
1 Source: Transmits report on concealment of underground explosions. Secret. 7 pp. 
Eisenhower Library, White House Office Files, Additional Records of the Office of the 
Special Assistant for Science and Technology, Disarmament-­Nuclear Policy.
