1122
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
In March 1979, the UN held its first follow-up at which the U.S.
proposed:4
—A UNGA Special Session in November 1980;
—National plans be developed by member states;
—In-country coordination be handled by the UNDP Resident
Representatives;
—A UN Steering Committee be established composed of seven
UN agencies who are in some way involved with water (UNDP, IBRD,
WHO, UNICEF, UN, ILO, FAO).
These recommendations were agreed to by member states and
were later confirmed by ECOSOC, WHO, UNDP, and the UN General
Assembly.
The UN agency activities having to do with water, which are not
inconsiderable, are given in Tab C.5
The 1978 agreement on a $2.5 billion bilateral target by AID over
the Decade for rural clean water had four conditions:
—LDCs must contribute their share;
—Other donor countries must put up their share (e.g. 75 percent);
—Good projects must be developed; and
—The expansion of AID funding must be done without crippling
other key AID efforts which, in practical terms, meant dependence on
new money.
Since the latter condition is unrealistic in today’s financial environ-
ment, most of the discussion by the Group centered on:
—What are we doing?—Is it more than the figures show?
—How important is “water” when compared with other priority
emphases such as energy, food, health, and population?
—How does the “rural” bias of AID’s efforts affect the shape of the
program?
On current support: The discussion made it clear that AID budget
figures on water, per se, in the health sector, understate the actual contri-
bution by the United States through other means such as components
in AID housing, food, and health programs, or through the World
Bank, etc. While rejuggling labels won’t change the fiscal picture into a
rosy one, the Group felt that adjustments in program management and
coordination could make some difference. AID agreed to the desir-
ability of looking into this. Moreover, it should be possible to demon-
strate at the UN and elsewhere that our support was institutional. Mr.
4 See footnote 3, Document 330.
5 Attached but not printed is an undated paper entitled “What are the key UN
Agencies Doing?”
