Honduras  831
HO–20.	
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Officer in Charge 
of Honduran Affairs (Chaplin)1
Washington, November 30, 1960.
SUBJECT
Financial Difficulties of the Standard Fruit Company
PARTICIPANTS
Acting Secretary Douglas Dillon
Representative Hale Boggs
Dr. Thomas S. D’Antoni—President,  
Standard Fruit Co.
Mr. Robert Smith Standard Fruit Co.
Mr. D. J. Kirchhoff Standard Fruit Co.
Mr. Kenneth H. Gormin—Bauerlein Inc., 
New Orleans
ARA—Deputy Assistant Secretary Milton 
Barall
ARA:OAP—Mr. Chaplin
Representative Boggs said that he had requested the appointment 
at the suggestion of Mr. Waugh of the EXIM Bank, who felt that the 
political implications of Standard Fruit’s financial problems should be 
brought to Mr. Dillon’s attention.2
Dr. D’Antoni related the history of the Standard Fruit Company, 
the circumstances of its critical financial condition, the fact that some 
50,000 people in Honduras were directly or indirectly dependent on 
company operations, and presented a memo3 showing that the com-
pany had lost $6.4 million in the first 8 months of 1960, primarily as 
a result of low banana prices. Mr. Dillon questioned Dr. D’Antoni to 
clarify that the primary reason for the banks’ refusal to renew credits to 
the company was the depressed banana market, with Latin American 
political conditions being a contributory factor.
Mr. Boggs suggested that if Standard were to cease operations, the 
consequent economic dislocation in Central America would give rise to 
demands for U. S. assistance far in excess of the amount needed by the 
company.
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 815.05111/11–3060. Confidential. 
Theodore L. Eliot, Jr., the Special Assistant to the Under Secretary of State, initialled his 
approval of this memorandum on December 2.
2 According to Chaplin’s memorandum of conversation dated November 28, 1960, 
D’Antoni had outlined the Standard Fruit Company’s financial problems to Assistant 
Secretary of State Mann and had raised the possibility of obtaining financial assistance 
for the company from the United States Government. In the course of this conversa-
tion, D’Antoni revealed that Standard Fruit was no longer able to secure financing from 
American banks, that the company had a $5.6 million note with the Chase Manhattan 
Bank that the bank was unwilling to renew, that Standard Fruit required $10 million 
in new financing to continue operations, and that he was meeting with Waugh on 
November 29 for the purpose of trying to obtain assistance from the Export-Import Bank. 
(Rubottom-Mann Files, Lot 62 D 418, “Honduras 1960”)
3 No memorandum concerning such matters has been found.
