256 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 —But the Khomeini regime and the Islamic republic seem likely to continue for at least the next 6 to 12 months, despite such problems as the insurrection in Tabriz.2 —During that time, the regime will face increasing problems, chiefly as a result of the need to assert full control over the country and to improve the economy. —Implementation of the regime’s ill-defined policies continues to be chaotic and is unlikely to improve significantly. —When Khomeini dies or is incapacitated, he will probably be succeeded by a strong religious leader, a coalition of secular opposition forces, or a combination of a moderate cleric and some of the more moderate opposition leaders. —No single element of the opposition or a coalition among them can be identified as the likely eventual successor to the present government. —There is little chance for the left to assume power in the near future. As the Iranian revolutionary regime approaches its first anniversary, it faces mounting problems. The current situation is highly fluid and in particular will be affected by the ultimate resolution of the US Embassy hostage situation. Strengths and Weaknesses The strength and legitimacy of the Khomeini regime rest on: —religious authority; —Ayatollah Khomeini’s revolutionary charisma; —mass support; —abundant money; —the opposition’s weakness; and —the outside world’s tolerance. But the regime does have weaknesses which have been increasingly evident: —collapse of the broad coalition which overthrew the Shah; —lack of institutions; it is a government that relies on individuals, chiefly Khomeini himself; —limited experience in running an effective government; 2 During the previous week, thousands of Azerbaijanis in Tabriz marched in support of Ayatollah Kazem Shariat-Madari who was critical of the new constitution. Demonstrators also took control of local government buildings and the central government’s radio and television stations. (Pranay Gupte, “Thousands of Azerbaijanis Parade in Tabriz to Support Their Ayatollah,” New York Times, December 8, 1979, p. 6)
