Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979 611 how we could deal effectively as a nation in competition with the Soviets after we rejected the SALT treaty is something that I cannot understand and which I would hate to have to face as a President. “So, I am asking the Senators—the ones that were sitting around this table day before yesterday [May 9]—‘Before you vote on SALT, take yourselves out of the role of a Senator or out of the role of the chairman or a member of the Armed Services Committee or the Foreign Relations Committee, and put yourself in the position of the President, who would have to implement a national policy and an international policy after our Nation was crippled, in effect, by the consequences of a SALT II rejection.’ “This is undoubtedly the most important single issue that I will ever have to face as President, unless we are faced with actual war. And I hope that every American will join in with me, not in a quiescent way, just observing what’s going on, but in an active way. And I particularly hope the news media will assess the details of the SALT agreement, the consequences of either passage or rejection, and let your voices be heard in the strongest possible way. “It transcends partisanship; it transcends the necessary objectivity of the news media toward politicians. And I hope that legitimately, within the bounds of the role of the news media, that you will actively support and promote the ratification of the SALT treaty.” (Public Papers: Carter, 1979, Book I, pages 845–852) 120. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1 Washington, May 29, 1979 SUBJECT Summit Strategy The memorandum that follows provides a framework for your approach to the summit by reviewing what we have learned from pre- 1 Source: Carter Library, Brzezinski Donated Historical Material, Geographic File, Box 19, U.S.S.R.—Vienna Summit Briefing Book, 6/79 [1]. Secret. The President wrote: “Zbig, David [Aaron], Warren [Christopher], and Marshall [Shulman]” in the top right-hand corner of the memorandum. The memorandum is also printed in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. VI, Soviet Union, Document 197.
